Investigating here, we see, not that it is a little thing we have, in having the bequeath'd
libraries, countless shelves of volumes, records, etc.; yet how serious the danger, depending
entirely on them, of the bloodless vein, the nerveless arm, the false application, at second
or third hand. We see that the real interest of this people of ours in the theology, history,
poetry, politics, and personal models of the past, (the British islands, for instance, and
indeed all the past,) is not necessarily to mould ourselves or our literature upon them, but
to attain fuller, more definite comparisons, warnings, and the insight to ourselves, our own
present, and our own far grander, different, future history, religion, social customs, &c.
We see that almost everything that has been written, sung, or stated, of old, with reference
to humanity under the feudal and oriental institutes, religions, and for other lands, needs
to be re-written, re-sung, re-stated, in terms consistent with the institution of these States,
and to come in range and obedient uniformity with them.

We see, as in the universes of the material kosmos, after meteorological, vegetable, and animal
cycles, man at last arises, born through them, to prove them, concentrate them, to turn upon
them with wonder and love--to command them, adorn them, and carry them upward into superior
realms--so, out of the series of the preceding social and political universes, now arise these
States. We see that while many were supposing things establish'd and completed, really the
grandest things always remain; and discover that the work of the New World is not ended, but
only fairly begun.

We see our land, America, her literature, esthetics, &c., as, substantially, the getting in
form, or effusement and statement, of deepest basic elements and loftiest final meanings, of
history and man--and the portrayal, (under the eternal laws and conditions of beauty,) of our
own physiognomy, the subjective tie and expression of the objective, as from our own combination,
continuation, and points of view--and the deposit and record of the national mentality, character,
appeals, heroism, wars, and even liberties--where these, and all, culminate in native literary
and artistic formulation, to be perpetuated; and not having which native, first-class formulation,
she will flounder about, and her other, however imposing, eminent greatness, prove merely a
passing gleam; but truly having which, she will understand herself, live nobly, nobly contribute,
emanate, and, swinging, poised safely on herself, illumin'd and illuming, become a full-form'd
world, and divine Mother not only of material but spiritual worlds, in ceaseless succession
through time--the main thing being the average, the bodily, the concrete, the democratic, the
popular, on which all the superstructures of the future are to permanently rest.

Notes:

[20] "From a territorial area of less than nine hundred thousand square miles, the Union has
expanded into over four millions and a half--fifteen times larger than that of Great Britain
and France combined--with a shore-line, including Alaska, equal to the entire circumference
of the earth, and with a domain within these lines far wider than that of the Romans in their
proudest days of conquest and renown. With a river, lake, and coastwise commerce estimated
at over two thousand millions of dollars per year; with a railway traffic of four to six thousand
millions per year, and the annual domestic exchanges of the country running up to nearly ten
thousand millions per year; with over two thousand millions of dollars invested in manufacturing,
mechanical, and mining industry; with over five hundred millions of acres of land in actual
occupancy, valued, with their appurtenances, at over seven thousand millions of dollars, and
producing annually crops valued at over three thousand millions of dollars; with a realm which,
if the density of Belgium's population were possible, would be vast enough to include all the
present inhabitants of the world; and with equal rights guaranteed to even the poorest and
humblest of our forty millions of people--we can, with a manly pride akin to that which distinguish'd
the palmiest days of Rome, claim," &c., &c., &c.--Vice-President Colfax's Speech, July 4, 1870.

LATER--London "Times," (Weekly,) June 23, '82.

"The wonderful wealth-producing power of the United States defies and sets at naught the grave
drawbacks of a mischievous protective tariff, and has already obliterated, almost wholly, the
traces of the greatest of modern civil wars. What is especially remarkable in the present development
of American energy and success is its wide and equable distribution. North and south, east
and west, on the shores of the Atlantic and the Pacific, along the chain of the great lakes,
in the valley of the Mississippi, and on the coasts of the gulf of Mexico, the creation of
wealth and the increase of population are signally exhibited. It is quite true, as has been
shown by the recent apportionment of population in the House of Representatives, that some
sections of the Union have advanced, relatively to the rest, in an extraordinary and unexpected
degree. But this does not imply that the States which have gain'd no additional representatives
or have actually lost some have been stationary or have receded. The fact is that the present
tide of prosperity has risen so high that it has overflow' d all barriers, and has fill'd up
the back-waters, and establish'd something like an approach to uniform success."

[21] See, for hereditaments, specimens, Walter Scott's Border Minstrelsy, Percy's collection,
Ellis's early English Metrical Romances, the European continental poems of Walter of Aquitania,
and the Nibelungen, of pagan stock, but monkish-feudal redaction; the history of the Troubadours,
by Fauriel; even the far-back cumbrous old Hindu epics, as indicating the Asian eggs out of
which European chivalry was hatch'd; Ticknor's chapters on the Cid, and on the Spanish poems
and poets of Calderon's time. Then always, and, of course, as the superbest poetic culmination-expression
of feudalism, the Shaksperean dramas, in the attitudes, dialogue, characters, &c., of the princes,
lords and gentlemen, the pervading atmosphere, the implied and express'd standard of manners,
the high port and proud stomach, the regal embroidery of style, &c.

[22] Of these rapidly-sketch'd hiatuses, the two which seem to me most serious are, for one,
the condition, absence, or perhaps the singular abeyance, of moral conscientious fibre all
through American society; and, for another, the appaling depletion of women in their powers
of sane athletic maternity, their crowning attribute, and ever making the woman, in loftiest
spheres, superior to the man.

I have sometimes thought, indeed, that the sole avenue and means of a reconstructed sociology
depended, primarily, on a new birth, elevation, expansion, invigoration of woman, affording,
for races to come, (as the conditions that antedate birth are indispensable,) a perfect motherhood.
Great, great, indeed, far greater than they know, is the sphere of women. But doubtless the
question of such new sociology all goes together, includes many varied and complex influences
and premises, and the man as well as the woman, and the woman as well as the man.

[23] The question hinted here is one which time only can answer. Must not the virtue of modern
Individualism, continually enlarging, usurping all, seriously affect, perhaps keep down entirely,
in America, the like of the ancient virtue of Patriotism, the fervid and absorbing love of
general country? I have no doubt myself that the two will merge, and will mutually profit and
brace each other, and that from them a greater product, a third, will arise. But I feel that
at present they and their oppositions form a serious problem and paradox in the United States.

[24] "SHOOTING NIAGARA."--I was at first roused to much anger and abuse by this essay from
Mr. Carlyle, so insulting to the theory of America--but happening to think afterwards how I
had more than once been in the like mood, during which his essay was evidently cast, and seen
persons and things in the same light, (indeed some might say there are signs of the same feeling
in these Vistas)--I have since read it again, not only as a study, expressing as it does certain
judgments from the highest feudal point of view, but have read it with respect as coming from
an earnest soul, and as contributing certain sharp-cutting metallic grains, which, if not gold
or silver, may be good, hard, honest iron.

[25] For fear of mistake, I may as well distinctly specify, as cheerfully included in the model
and standard of these Vistas, a practical, stirring, worldly, money-making, even materialistic
character. It is undeniable that our farms, stores, offices, dry-goods, coal and groceries,
enginery, cash-accounts, trades, earnings, markets, &c., should be attended to in earnest,
and actively pursued, just as if they had a real and permanent existence. I perceive clearly
that the extreme business energy, and this almost maniacal appetite for wealth prevalent in
the United States, are parts of amelioration and progress, indispensably needed to prepare
the very results I demand. My theory includes riches, and the getting of riches, and the amplest
products, power, activity, inventions, movements, &c. Upon them, as upon substrata, I raise
the edifice design'd in these Vistas.

[26] The whole present system of the officering and personnel of the army and navy of these
States, and the spirit and letter of their trebly-aristocratic rules and regulations, is a
monstrous exotic, a nuisance and revolt, and belong here just as much as orders of nobility,
or the Pope's council of cardinals. I say if the present theory of our army and navy is sensible
and true, then the rest of America is an unmitigated fraud.

[27] A: After the rest is satiated, all interest culminates in the field of persons, and never
flags there. Accordingly in this field have the great poets and literatuses signally toil'd.
They too, in all ages, all lands, have been creators, fashioning, making types of men and women,
as Adam and Eve are made in the divine fable. Behold, shaped, bred by orientalism, feudalism,
through their long growth and culmination, and breeding back in return--(when shall we have
an equal series, typical of democracy?)--behold, commencing in primal Asia, (apparently formulated,
in what beginning we know, in the gods of the mythologies, and coming down thence,) a few samples
out of the countless product, bequeath'd to the moderns, bequeath'd to America as studies.
For the men, Yudishtura, Rama, Arjuna, Solomon, most of the Old and New Testament characters;
Achilles, Ulysses, Theseus, Prometheus, Hercules, Aeneas, Plutarch's heroes; the Merlin of
Celtic bards; the Cid, Arthur and his knights, Siegfried and Hagen in the Nibelungen; Roland
and Oliver; Roustam in the Shah-Nemah; and so on to Milton's Satan, Cervantes' Don Quixote,
Shakspere's Hamlet, Richard II., Lear, Marc Antony, &c., and the modern Faust. These, I say,
are models, combined, adjusted to other standards than America's, but of priceless value to
her and hers.

Among women, the goddesses of the Egyptian, Indian and Greek mythologies, certain Bible characters,
especially the Holy Mother; Cleopatra, Penelope; the portraits of Brunhelde and Chriemhilde
in the Nibelungen; Oriana, Una, &c.; the modern Consuelo, Walter Scott's Jeanie and Effie Deans,
&c., &c. (Yet woman portray'd or outlin'd at her best, or as perfect human mother, does not
hitherto, it seems to me, fully appear in literature.)

[28] Note, to-day, an instructive, curious spectacle and conflict. Science, (twin in its fields,
of Democracy in its)--Science, testing absolutely all thoughts, all works, has already burst
well upon the world--a sun, mounting, most illuminating, most glorious--surely never again
to set. But against it, deeply entrench'd, holding possession, yet remains, (not only through
the churches and schools, but by imaginative literature, and unregenerate poetry,) the fossil
theology of the mythic-materialistic, superstitious, untaught and credulous, fable-loving,
primitive ages of humanity.

[29] It is to the development, identification, and general prevalence of that fervid comradeship,
(the adhesive love, at least rivaling the amative love hitherto possessing imaginative literature,
if not going beyond it,) that I look for the counterbalance and offset of our materialistic
and vulgar American democracy, and for the spiritualization thereof. Many will say it is a
dream, and will not follow my inferences: but I confidently expect a time when there will be
seen, running like a half-hid warp through all the myriad audible and visible worldly interests
of America, threads of manly friendship, fond and loving, pure and sweet, strong and life-long,
carried to degrees hitherto unknown--not only giving tone to individual character, and making
it unprecedently emotional, muscular, heroic, and refined, but having the deepest relations
to general politics. I say democracy infers such loving comradeship, as its most inevitable
twin or counterpart, without which it will be incomplete, in vain, and incapable of perpetuating
itself.

[30] I am reminded as I write that out of this very conscience, or idea of conscience, of intense
moral right, and in its name and strain'd construction, the worst fanaticisms, wars, persecutions,
murders, &c., have yet, in all lands, in the past, been broach'd, and have come to their devilish
fruition. Much is to be said--but I may say here, and in response, that side by side with the
unflagging stimulation of the elements of religion and conscience must henceforth move with
equal sway, science, absolute reason, and the general proportionate development of the whole
man. These scientific facts, deductions, are divine too--precious counted parts of moral civilization,
and, with physical health, indispensable to it, to prevent fanaticism. For abstract religion,
I perceive, is easily led astray, ever credulous, and is capable of devouring, remorseless,
like fire and flame. Conscience, too, isolated from all else, and from the emotional nature,
may but attain the beauty and purity of glacial, snowy ice. We want, for these States, for
the general character, a cheerful, religious fervor, endued with the ever-present modifications
of the human emotions, friendship, benevolence, with a fair field for scientific inquiry, the
right of individual judgment, and always the cooling influences of material Nature.

[31] The culmination and fruit of literary artistic expression, and its final fields of pleasure
for the human soul, are in metaphysics, including the mysteries of the spiritual world, the
soul itself, and the question of the immortal continuation of our identity. In all ages, the
mind of man has brought up here--and always will. Here, at least, of whatever race or era,
we stand on common ground. Applause, too, is unanimous, antique or modern. Those authors who
work well in this field--though their reward, instead of a handsome percentage, or royalty,
may be but simply the laurel-crown of the victors in the great Olympic games--will be dearest
to humanity, and their works, however esthetically defective, will be treasur'd forever. The
altitude of literature and poetry has always been religion--and always will be. The Indian
Vedas, the Nackas of Zoroaster, the Tal mud of the Jews, the Old Testament, the Gospel of Christ
and his disciples, Plato's works, the Koran of Mohammed, the Edda of Snorro, and so on toward
our own day, to Swedenborg, and to the invaluable contributions of Leibnitz, Kant and Hegel--these,
with such poems only in which, (while singing well of persons and events, of the passions of
man, and the shows of the material universe,) the religious tone, the consciousness of mystery,
the recognition of the future, of the unknown, of Deity over and under all, and of the divine
purpose, are never absent, but indirectly give tone to all--exhibit literature's real heights
and elevations, towering up like the great mountains of the earth.

Standing on this ground--the last, the highest, only permanent ground--and sternly criticising,
from it, all works, either of the literary, or any art, we have peremptorily to dismiss every
pretensive production, however fine its esthetic or intellectual points, which violates or
ignores, or even does not celebrate, the central divine idea of All, suffusing universe, of
eternal trains of purpose, in the development, by however slow degrees, of the physical, moral,
and spiritual kosmos. I say he has studied, meditated to no profit, whatever may be his mere
erudition, who has not absorbed this simple consciousness and faith. It is not entirely new--but
it is for Democracy to elaborate it, and look to build upon and expand from it, with uncompromising
reliance. Above the doors of teaching the inscription is to appear, Though little or nothing
can be absolutely known, perceiv'd, except from a point of view which is evanescent, yet we
know at least one permanency, that Time and Space, in the will of God, furnish successive chains,
completions of material births and beginnings, solve all discrepancies, fears and doubts, and
eventually fulfil happiness--and that the prophecy of those births, namely spiritual results,
throws the true arch over all teaching, all science. The local considerations of sin, disease,
deformity, ignorance, death, &c., and their measurement by the superficial mind, and ordinary
legislation and theology, are to be met by science, boldly accepting, promulging this faith,
and planting the seeds of superber laws--of the explication of the physical universe through
the spiritual--and clearing the way for a religion, sweet and unimpugnable alike to little
child or great savan.

ORIGINS OF ATTEMPTED SECESSION

Not the whole matter, but some side facts worth conning to-day and any day.

I consider the war of attempted secession, 1860-'65, not as a struggle of two distinct and
separate peoples, but a conflict (often happening, and very fierce) between the passions and
paradoxes of one and the same identity--perhaps the only terms on which that identity could
really become fused, homogeneous and lasting. The origin and conditions out of which it arose,
are full of lessons, full of warnings yet to the Republic--and always will be. The underlying
and principal of those origins are yet singularly ignored. The Northern States were really
just as responsible for that war, (in its precedents, foundations, instigations,) as the South.
Let me try to give my view. From the age of 21 to 40, (1840-'60,) I was interested in the political
movements of the land, not so much as a participant, but as an observer, and a regular voter
at the elections. I think I was conversant with the springs of action, and their workings,
not only in New York city and Brooklyn, but understood them in the whole country, as I had
made leisurely tours through all the middle States, and partially through the western and southern,
and down to New Orleans, in which city I resided for some time. (I was there at the close of
the Mexican war--saw and talk'd with General Taylor, and the other generals and officers, who
were feted and detain'd several days on their return victorious from that expedition.)

Of course many and very contradictory things, specialties, developments, constitutional views,
&c., went to make up the origin of the war--but the most significant general fact can be best
indicated and stated as follows: For twenty-five years previous to the outbreak, the controling
"Democratic" nominating conventions of our Republic--starting from their primaries in wards
or districts, and so expanding to counties, powerful cities, States, and to the great Presidential
nominating conventions--were getting to represent and be composed of more and more putrid and
dangerous materials. Let me give a schedule, or list, of one of these representative conventions
for a long time before, and inclusive of, that which nominated Buchanan. (Remember they had
come to be the fountains and tissues of the American body politic, forming, as it were, the
whole blood, legislation, office-holding, &c.) One of these conventions, from 1840 to '60,
exhibited a spectacle such as could never be seen except in our own age and in these States.
The members who composed it were, seven-eighths of them, the meanest kind of bawling and blowing
office-holders, office-seekers, pimps, malignants, conspirators, murderers, fancy-men, custom-house
clerks, contractors, kept-editors, spaniels well-train'd to carry and fetch, jobbers, infidels,
disunionists, terrorists, mail-riflers, slave-catchers, pushers of slavery, creatures of the
President, creatures of would-be Presidents, spies, bribers, compromisers, lobbyers, sponges,
ruin'd sports, expell'd gamblers, policy-backers, monte-dealers, duellists, carriers of conceal'd
weapons, deaf men, pimpled men, scarr'd inside with vile disease, gaudy outside with gold chains
made from the people's money and harlots' money twisted together; crawling, serpentine men,
the lousy combings and born freedom-sellers of the earth. And whence came they? From back-yards
and bar-rooms; from out of the custom-houses, marshals' offices, post-offices, and gambling-hells;
from the President's house, the jail, the station-house; from unnamed by-places, where devilish
disunion was hatch'd at midnight; from political hearses, and from the coffins inside, and
from the shrouds inside of the coffins; from the tumors and abscesses of the land; from the
skeletons and skulls in the vaults of the federal almshouses; and from the running sores of
the great cities. Such, I say, form'd, or absolutely controll'd the forming of, the entire
personnel, the atmosphere, nutriment and chyle, of our municipal, State, and National politics--substantially
permeating, handling, deciding, and wielding everything--legislation, nominations, elections,
"public sentiment," &c.--while the great masses of the people, farmers, mechanics, and traders,
were helpless in their gripe. These conditions were mostly prevalent in the north and west,
and especially in New York and Philadelphia cities; and the southern leaders, (bad enough,
but of a far higher order,) struck hands and affiliated with, and used them. Is it strange
that a thunder-storm follow'd such morbid and stifling cloud-strata?

I say then, that what, as just outlined, heralded, and made the ground ready for secession
revolt, ought to be held up, through all the future, as the most instructive lesson in American
political history--the most significant warning and beacon-light to coming generations. I say
that the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth terms of the American Presidency have shown
that the villainy and shallowness of rulers (back'd by the machinery of great parties) are
just as eligible to these States as to any foreign despotism, kingdom, or empire--there is
not a bit of difference. History is to record those three Presidentiads, and especially the
administrations of Fillmore and Buchanan, as so far our topmost warning and shame. Never were
publicly display'd more deform'd, mediocre, snivelling, unreliable, false-hearted men. Never
were these States so insulted, and attempted to be betray'd. All the main purposes for which
the government was establish'd were openly denied. The perfect equality of slavery with freedom
was flauntingly preach'd in the north--nay, the superiority of slavery. The slave trade was
proposed to be renew'd. Everywhere frowns and misunderstandings--everywhere exasperations and
humiliations. (The slavery contest is settled--and the war is long over--yet do not those putrid
conditions, too many of them, still exist? still result in diseases, fevers, wounds--not of
war and army hospitals--but the wounds and diseases of peace?)

Out of those generic influences, mainly in New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, &c., arose the attempt
at disunion. To philosophical examination, the malignant fever of that war shows its embryonic
sources, and the original nourishment of its life and growth, in the north. I say secession,
below the surface, originated and was brought to maturity in the free States. I allude to the
score of years preceding 1860. My deliberate opinion is now, that if at the opening of the
contest the abstract duality-question of slavery and quiet could have been submitted to a direct
popular vote, as against their opposite, they would have triumphantly carried the day in a
majority of the northern States--in the large cities, leading off with New York and Philadelphia,
by tremendous majorities. The events of '61 amazed everybody north and south, and burst all
prophecies and calculations like bubbles. But even then, and during the whole war, the stern
fact remains that (not only did the north put it down, but) the secession cause had numerically
just as many sympathizers in the free as in the rebel States.

As to slavery, abstractly and practically, (its idea, and the determination to establish and
expand it, especially in the new territories, the future America,) it is too common, I repeat,
to identify it exclusively with the south. In fact down to the opening of the war, the whole
country had about an equal hand in it. The north had at least been just as guilty, if not more
guilty; and the east and west had. The former Presidents and Congresses had been guilty--the
governors and legislatures of every northern State had been guilty, and the mayors of New York
and other northern cities had all been guilty--their hands were all stain'd. And as the conflict
took decided shape, it is hard to tell which class, the leading southern or northern disunionists,
was more stunn'd and disappointed at the non-action of the free-State secession element, so
largely existing and counted on by those leaders, both sections.

So much for that point, and for the north. As to the inception and direct instigation of the
war, in the south itself, I shall not attempt interiors or complications. Behind all, the idea
that it was from a resolute and arrogant determination on the part of the extreme slaveholders,
the Calhounites, to carry the States-rights' portion of the constitutional compact to its farthest
verge, and nationalize slavery, or else disrupt the Union, and found a new empire, with slavery
for its corner-stone, was and is undoubtedly the true theory. (If successful, this attempt
might--I am not sure, but it might--have destroy'd not only our American republic, in anything
like first-class proportions, in itself and its prestige, but for ages at least, the cause
of Liberty and Equality everywhere--and would have been the greatest triumph of reaction, and
the severest blow to political and every other freedom, possible to conceive. Its worst result
would have inured to the southern States themselves.) That our national democratic experiment,
principle, and machinery, could triumphantly sustain such a shock, and that the Constitution
could weather it, like a ship a storm, and come out of it as sound and whole as before, is
by far the most signal proof yet of the stability of that experiment, Democracy, and of those
principles, and that Constitution.

Of the war itself, we know in the ostent what has been done. The numbers of the dead and wounded
can be told or approximated, the debt posted and put on record, the material events narrated,
&c. Meantime, elections go on, laws are pass'd, political parties struggle, issue their platforms,
&c., just the same as before. But immensest results, not only in politics, but in literature,
poems, and sociology, are doubtless waiting yet unform'd in the future. How long they will
wait I cannot tell. The pageant of history's retrospect shows us, ages since, all Europe marching
on the crusades, those arm'd uprisings of the people, stirr'd by a mere idea, to grandest attempt--and,
when once baffled in it, returning, at intervals, twice, thrice, and again. An unsurpass'd
series of revolutionary events, influences. Yet it took over two hundred years for the seeds
of the crusades to germinate, before beginning even to sprout. Two hundred years they lay,
sleeping, not dead, but dormant in the ground. Then, out of them, unerringly, arts, travel,
navigation, politics, literature, freedom, the spirit of adventure, inquiry, all arose, grew,
and steadily sped on to what we see at present. Far back there, that huge agitation-struggle
of the crusades stands, as undoubtedly the embryo, the start, of the high preeminence of experiment,
civilization and enterprise which the European nations have since sustain'd, and of which these
States are the heirs.

Another illustration--(history is full of them, although the war itself, the victory of the
Union, and the relations of our equal States, present features of which there are no precedents
in the past.) The conquest of England eight centuries ago, by the Franco-Normans--the obliteration
of the old, (in many respects so needing obliteration)--the Domesday Book, and the repartition
of the land--the old impedimenta removed, even by blood and ruthless violence, and a new, progressive
genesis establish'd, new seeds sown--time has proved plain enough that, bitter as they were,
all these were the most salutary series of revolutions that could possibly have happen'd. Out
of them, and by them mainly, have come, out of Albic, Roman and Saxon England--and without
them could not have come--not only the England of the 500 years down to the present, and of
the present--but these States. Nor, except for that terrible dislocation and overturn, would
these States, as they are, exist to-day.

It is certain to me that the United States, by virtue of that war and its results, and through
that and them only, are now ready to enter, and must certainly enter, upon their genuine career
in history, as no more torn and divided in their spinal requisites, but a great homogeneous
Nation--free States all--a moral and political unity in variety, such as Nature shows in her
grandest physical works, and as much greater than any mere work of Nature, as the moral and
political, the work of man, his mind, his soul, are, in their loftiest sense, greater than
the merely physical. Out of that war not only has the nationality of the States escaped from
being strangled, but more than any of the rest, and, in my opinion, more than the north itself,
the vital heart and breath of the south have escaped as from the pressure of a general nightmare,
and are henceforth to enter on a life, development, and active freedom, whose realities are
certain in the future, notwithstanding all the southern vexations of the hour--a development
which could not possibly have been achiev'd on any less terms, or by any other means than that
grim lesson, or something equivalent to it. And I predict that the south is yet to outstrip
the north. Brooklyn, N.Y.

America does not repel the past, or what the past has produced under its forms, or amid other
politics, or the idea of castes, or the old religions--accepts the lesson with calmness--is
not impatient because the slough still sticks to opinions and manners in literature, while
the life which served its requirements has passed into the new life of the new forms--perceives
that the corpse is slowly borne from the eating and sleeping rooms of the house--perceives
that it waits a little while in the door--that it was fittest for its days--that its action
has descended to the stalwart and well-shaped heir who approaches--and that he shall be fittest
for his days.

The Americans of all nations at any time upon the earth, have probably the fullest poetical
nature. The United States themselves are essentially the greatest poem. In the history of the
earth hitherto, the largest and most stirring appear tame and orderly to their ampler largeness
and stir. Here at last is something in the doings of man that corresponds with the broadcast
doings of the day and night. Here is action untied from strings, necessarily blind to particulars
and details, magnificently moving in masses. Here is the hospitality which for ever indicates
heroes. Here the performance, disdaining the trivial, unapproach'd in the tremendous audacity
of its crowds and groupings, and the push of its perspective, spreads with crampless and flowing
breadth, and showers its prolific and splendid extravagance. One sees it must indeed own the
riches of the summer and winter, and need never be bankrupt while corn grows from the ground,
or the orchards drop apples, or the bays contain fish, or men beget children upon women.

Other states indicate themselves in their deputies--but the genius of the United States is
not best or most in its executives or legislatures, nor in its ambassadors or authors, or colleges
or churches or parlors, nor even in its newspapers or inventors--but always most in the common
people, south, north, west, east, in all its States, through all its mighty amplitude. The
largeness of the nation, however, were monstrous without a corresponding largeness and generosity
of the spirit of the citizen. Not swarming states, nor streets and steamships, nor prosperous
business, nor farms, nor capital, nor learning, may suffice for the ideal of man--nor suffice
the poet. No reminiscences may suffice either. A live nation can always cut a deep mark, and
can have the best authority the cheapest--namely, from its own soul. This is the sum of the
profitable uses of individuals or states, and of present action and grandeur, and of the subjects
of poets. (As if it were necessary to trot back generation after generation to the eastern
records! As if the beauty and sacredness of the demonstrable must fall behind that of the mythical!
As if men do not make their mark out of any times! As if the opening of the western continent
by discovery, and what has transpired in North and South America, were less than the small
theatre of the antique, or the aimless sleep-walking of the middle ages!) The pride of the
United States leaves the wealth and finesse of the cities, and all returns of commerce and
agriculture, and all the magnitude of geography or shows of exterior victory, to enjoy the
sight and realization of full-sized men, or one full-sized man unconquerable and simple. The
American poets are to enclose old and new, for America is the race of races. The expression
of the American poet is to be transcendent and new. It is to be indirect, and not direct or
descriptive or epic. Its quality goes through these to much more. Let the age and wars of other
nations be chanted, and their eras and characters be illustrated, and that finish the verse.
Not so the great psalm of the republic. Here the theme is creative, and has vista. Whatever
stagnates in the flat of custom or obedience or legislation, the great poet never stagnates.
Obedience does not master him, he masters it. High up out of reach he stands, turning a concentrated
light--he turns the pivot with his finger--he baffles the swiftest runners as he stands, and
easily overtakes and envelopes them. The time straying toward infidelity and confections and
persiflage he withholds by steady faith. Faith is the antiseptic of the soul--it pervades the
common people and preserves them--they never give up believing and expecting and trusting.
There is that indescribable freshness and unconsciousness about an illiterate person, that
humbles and mocks the power of the noblest expressive genius. The poet sees for a certainty
how one not a great artist may be just as sacred and perfect as the greatest artist.

The power to destroy or remould is freely used by the greatest poet, but seldom the power of
attack. What is past is past. If he does not expose superior models, and prove himself by every
step he takes, he is not what is wanted. The presence of the great poet conquers--not parleying,
or struggling, or any prepared attempts. Now he has passed that way, see after him! There is
not left any vestige of despair, or misanthropy, or cunning, or exclusiveness, or the ignominy
of a nativity or color, or delusion of hell or the necessity of hell--and no man thenceforward
shall be degraded for ignorance or weakness or sin. The greatest poet hardly knows pettiness
or triviality. If he breathes into anything that was before thought small, it dilates with
the grandeur and life of the universe. He is a seer--he is individual--he is complete in himself--the
others are as good as he, only he sees it, and they do not. He is not one of the chorus--he
does not stop for any regulation--he is the president of regulation. What the eyesight does
to the rest, he does to the rest. Who knows the curious mystery of the eyesight? The other
senses corroborate themselves, but this is removed from any proof but its own, and foreruns
the identities of the spiritual world. A single glance of it mocks all the investigations of
man, and all the instruments and books of the earth, and all reasoning. What is marvellous?
what is unlikely? what is impossible or baseless or vague--after you have once just open'd
the space of a peach-pit, and given audience to far and near, and to the sunset, and had all
things enter with electric swiftness, softly and duly, without confusion or jostling or jam?

The land and sea, the animals, fishes and birds, the sky of heaven and the orbs, the forests,
mountains and rivers, are not small themes --but folks expect of the poet to indicate more
than the beauty and dignity which always attach to dumb real objects--they expect him to indicate
the path between reality and their souls. Men and women perceive the beauty well enough--probably
as well as he. The passionate tenacity of hunters, woodmen, early risers, cultivators of gardens
and orchards and fields, the love of healthy women for the manly form, seafaring persons, drivers
of horses, the passion for light and the open air, all is an old varied sign of the unfailing
perception of beauty, and of a residence of the poetic in out-door people. They can never be
assisted by poets to perceive--some may, but they never can. The poetic quality is not marshal'd
in rhyme or uniformity, or abstract addresses to things, nor in melancholy complaints or good
precepts, but is the life of these and much else, and is in the soul. The profit of rhyme is
that it drops seeds of a sweeter and more luxuriant rhyme, and of uniformity that it conveys
itself into its own roots in the ground out of sight. The rhyme and uniformity of perfect poems
show the free growth of metrical laws, and bud from them as unerringly and loosely as lilacs
and roses on a bush, and take shapes as compact as the shapes of chestnuts and oranges, and
melons and pears, and shed the perfume impalpable to form. The fluency and ornaments of the
finest poems or music or orations or recitations, are not independent but dependent. All beauty
comes from beautiful blood and a beautiful brain. If the greatnesses are in conjunction in
a man or woman, it is enough--the fact will prevail through the universe; but the gaggery and
gilt of a million years will not prevail. Who troubles himself about his ornaments or fluency
is lost. This is what you shall do: Love the earth and sun and the animals, despise riches,
give alms to every one that asks, stand up for the stupid and crazy, devote your income and
labor to others, hate tyrants, argue not concerning God, have patience and indulgence toward
the people, take off your hat to nothing known or unknown, or to any man or number of men--go
freely with powerful uneducated persons, and with the young, and with the mothers of families--re-examine
all you have been told in school or church or in any book, and dismiss whatever insults your
own soul; and your very flesh shall be a great poem, and have the richest fluency, not only
in its words, but in the silent lines of its lips and face, and between the lashes of your
eyes, and in every motion and joint of your body. The poet shall not spend his time in unneeded
work. He shall know that the ground is already plough'd and manured; others may not know it,
but he shall. He shall go directly to the creation. His trust shall master the trust of everything
he touches--and shall master all attachment.

The known universe has one complete lover, and that is the greatest poet. He consumes an eternal
passion, and is indifferent which chance happens, and which possible contingency of fortune
or misfortune, and persuades daily and hourly his delicious pay. What balks or breaks others
is fuel for his burning progress to contact and amorous joy. Other proportions of the reception
of pleasure dwindle to nothing to his proportions. All expected from heaven or from the highest,
he is rapport with in the sight of the daybreak, or the scenes of the winter woods, or the
presence of children playing, or with his arm round the neck of a man or woman. His love above
all love has leisure and expanse--he leaves room ahead of himself. He is no irresolute or suspicious
lover--he is sure--he scorns intervals. His experience and the showers and thrills are not
for nothing. Nothing can jar him--suffering and darkness cannot--death and fear cannot. To
him complaint and jealousy and envy are corpses buried and rotten in the earth--he saw them
buried. The sea is not surer of the shore, or the shore of the sea, than he is the fruition
of his love, and of all perfection and beauty.

The fruition of beauty is no chance of miss or hit--it is as inevitable as life--it is exact
and plumb as gravitation. From the eyesight proceeds another eyesight, and from the hearing
proceeds another hearing, and from the voice proceeds another voice, eternally curious of the
harmony of things with man. These understand the law of perfection in masses and floods--that
it is profuse and impartial--that there is not a minute of the light or dark, nor an acre of
the earth and sea, without it--nor any direction of the sky, nor any trade or employment, nor
any turn of events. This is the reason that about the proper expression of beauty there is
precision and balance. One part does not need to be thrust above another. The best singer is
not the one who has the most lithe and powerful organ. The pleasure of poems is not in them
that take the handsomest measure and sound.

Without effort, and without exposing in the least how it is done, the greatest poet brings
the spirit of any or all events and passions and scenes and persons, some more and some less,
to bear on your individual character as you hear or read. To do this well is to compete with
the laws that pursue and follow Time. What is the purpose must surely be there, and the clue
of it must be there--and the faintest indication is the indication of the best, and then becomes
the clearest indication. Past and present and future are not disjoin'd but join'd. The greatest
poet forms the consistence of what is to be, from what has been and is. He drags the dead out
of their coffins and stands them again on their feet. He says to the past, Rise and walk before
me that I may realize you. He learns the lesson--he places himself where the future becomes
present. The greatest poet does not only dazzle his rays over character and scenes and passions--he
finally ascends, and finishes all--he exhibits the pinnacles that no man can tell what they
are for, or what is beyond--he glows a moment on the extremest verge. He is most wonderful
in his last half-hidden smile or frown; by that flash of the moment of parting the one that
sees it shall be encouraged or terrified afterward for many years. The greatest poet does not
moralize or make applications of morals--he knows the soul. The soul has that measureless pride
which consists in never acknowledging any lessons or deductions but its own. But it has sympathy
as measureless as its pride, and the one balances the other, and neither can stretch too far
while it stretches in company with the other. The inmost secrets of art sleep with the twain.
The greatest poet has lain close betwixt both, and they are vital in his style and thoughts.

The art of art, the glory of expression and the sunshine of the light of letters, is simplicity.
Nothing is better than simplicity--nothing can make up for excess, or for the lack of definiteness.
To carry on the heave of impulse and pierce intellectual depths and give all subjects their
articulations, are powers neither common nor very uncommon. But to speak in literature with
the perfect rectitude and insouciance of the movements of animals, and the unimpeachableness
of the sentiment of trees in the woods and grass by the roadside, is the flawless triumph of
art. If you have look'd on him who has achiev'd it you have look'd on one of the masters of
the artists of all nations and times. You shall not contemplate the flight of the gray gull
over the bay, or the mettlesome action of the blood horse, or the tall leaning of sunflowers
on their stalk, or the appearance of the sun journeying through heaven, or the appearance of
the moon afterward, with any more satisfaction than you shall contemplate him. The great poet
has less a mark'd style, and is more the channel of thoughts and things without increase or
diminution, and is the free channel of himself. He swears to his art, I will not be meddlesome,
I will not have in my writing any elegance, or effect, or originality, to hang in the way between
me and the rest like curtains. I will have nothing hang in the way, not the richest curtains.
What I tell I tell for precisely what it is. Let who may exalt or startle or fascinate or soothe,
I will have purposes as health or heat or snow has, and be as regardless of observation. What
I experience or portray shall go from my composition without a shred of my composition. You
shall stand by my side and look in the mirror with me.

The old red blood and stainless gentility of great poets will be proved by their unconstraint.
A heroic person walks at his ease through and out of that custom or precedent or authority
that suits him not. Of the traits of the brotherhood of first-class writers, savans, musicians,
inventors and artists, nothing is finer than silent defiance advancing from new free forms.
The cleanest expression is that which finds no sphere worthy of itself, and makes one.

The messages of great poems to each man and woman are, Come to us on equal terms, only then
can you understand us. We are no better than you, what we inclose you inclose, what we enjoy
you may enjoy. Did you suppose there could be only one Supreme? We affirm there can be unnumber'd
Supremes, and that one does not countervail another any more than one eyesight countervails
another--and that men can be good or grand only of the consciousness of their supremacy within
them. What do you think is the grandeur of storms and dismemberments, and the deadliest battles
and wrecks, and the wildest fury of the elements, and the power of the sea, and the motion
of Nature, and the throes of human desires, and dignity and hate and love? It is that something
in the soul which says, Rage on, whirl on, I tread master here and everywhere--Master of the
spasms of the sky and of the shatter of the sea, Master of nature and passion and death, and
of all terror and all pain.

The American bards shall be mark'd for generosity and affection, and for encouraging competitors.
They shall be Kosmos, without monopoly or secrecy, glad to pass anything to any one--hungry
for equals night and day. They shall not be careful of riches and privilege--they shall be
riches and privilege--they shall perceive who the most affluent man is. The most affluent man
is he that confronts all the shows he sees by equivalents out of the stronger wealth of himself.
The American bard shall delineate no class of persons, nor one or two out of the strata of
interests, nor love most nor truth most, nor the soul most, nor the body most--and not be for
the Eastern States more than the Western, or the Northern States more than the Southern.

Exact science and its practical movements are no checks on the greatest poet, but always his
encouragement and support. The outset and remembrance are there--there the arms that lifted
him first, and braced him best--there he returns after all his goings and comings. The sailor
and traveler--the anatomist, chemist, astronomer, geologist, phrenologist, spiritualist, mathematician,
historian, and lexicographer, are not poets, but they are the lawgivers of poets, and their
construction underlies the structure of every perfect poem. No matter what rises or is utter'd,
they sent the seed of the conception of it--of them and by them stand the visible proofs of
souls. If there shall be love and content between the father and the son, and if the greatness
of the son is the exuding of the greatness of the father, there shall be love between the poet
and the man of demonstrable science. In the beauty of poems are henceforth the tuft and final
applause of science.

Great is the faith of the flush of knowledge, and of the investigation of the depths of qualities
and things. Cleaving and circling here swells the soul of the poet, yet is president of itself
always. The depths are fathomless, and therefore calm. The innocence and nakedness are resumed--they
are neither modest nor immodest. The whole theory of the supernatural, and all that was twined
with it or educed out of it, departs as a dream. What has ever happen'd--what happens, and
whatever may or shall happen, the vital laws inclose all. They are sufficient for any case
and for all cases--none to be hurried or retarded--any special miracle of affairs or persons
inadmissible in the vast clear scheme where every motion and every spear of grass, and the
frames and spirits of men and women and all that concerns them, are unspeakably perfect miracles,
all referring to all, and each distinct and in its place. It is also not consistent with the
reality of the soul to admit that there is anything in the known universe more divine than
men and women.

Men and women, and the earth and all upon it, are to be taken as they are, and the investigation
of their past and present and future shall be unintermitted, and shall be done with perfect
candor. Upon this basis philosophy speculates, ever looking towards the poet, ever regarding
the eternal tendencies of all toward happiness, never inconsistent with what is clear to the
senses and to the soul. For the eternal tendencies of all toward happiness make the only point
of sane philosophy. Whatever comprehends less than that--whatever is less than the laws of
light and of astronomical motion--or less than the laws that follow the thief, the liar, the
glutton and the drunkard, through this life and doubtless afterward--or less than vast stretches
of time, or the slow formation of density, or the patient upheaving of strata--is of no account.
Whatever would put God in a poem or system of philosophy as contending against some being or
influence, is also of no account. Sanity and ensemble characterize the great master --spoilt
in one principle, all is spoilt. The great master has nothing to do with miracles. He sees
health for himself in being one of the mass--he sees the hiatus in singular eminence. To the
perfect shape comes common ground. To be under the general law is great, for that is to correspond
with it. The master knows that he is unspeakably great, and that all are unspeakably great--that
nothing, for instance, is greater than to conceive children, and bring them up well--that to
be is just as great as to perceive or tell.

In the make of the great masters the idea of political liberty is indispensable. Liberty takes
the adherence of heroes wherever man and woman exist--but never takes any adherence or welcome
from the rest more than from poets. They are the voice and exposition of liberty. They out
of ages are worthy the grand idea--to them it is confided, and they must sustain it. Nothing
has precedence of it, and nothing can warp or degrade it.

As the attributes of the poets of the kosmos concentre in the real body, and in the pleasure
of things, they possess the superiority of genuineness over all fiction and romance. As they
emit themselves, facts are shower'd over with light--the daylight is lit with more volatile
light--the deep between the setting and rising sun goes deeper many fold. Each precise object
or condition or combination or process exhibits a beauty--the multiplication table its--old
age its --the carpenter's trade its--the grand opera its--the huge-hull'd clean-shap'd New
York clipper at sea under steam or full sail gleams with unmatch'd beauty--the American circles
and large harmonies of government gleam with theirs--and the commonest definite intentions
and actions with theirs. The poets of the kosmos advance through all interpositions and coverings
and turmoils and stratagems to first principles. They are of use--they dissolve poverty from
its need, and riches from its conceit. You large proprietor, they say, shall not realize or
perceive more than any one else. The owner of the library is not he who holds a legal title
to it, having bought and paid for it. Any one and every one is owner of the library, (indeed
he or she alone is owner,) who can read the same through all the varieties of tongues and subjects
and styles, and in whom they enter with ease, and make supple and powerful and rich and large.

These American States, strong and healthy and accomplish'd, shall receive no pleasure from
violations of natural models, and must not permit them. In paintings or mouldings or carvings
in mineral or wood, or in the illustrations of books or newspapers, or in the patterns of woven
stuffs, or anything to beautify rooms or furniture or costumes, or to put upon cornices or
monuments, or on the prows or sterns of ships, or to put anywhere before the human eye indoors
or out, that which distorts honest shapes, or which creates unearthly beings or places or contingencies,
is a nuisance and revolt. Of the human form especially, it is so great it must never be made
ridiculous. Of ornaments to a work nothing outre can be allow'd--but those ornaments can be
allow'd that conform to the perfect facts of the open air, and that flow out of the nature
of the work, and come irrepressibly from it, and are necessary to the completion of the work.
Most works are most beautiful without ornament. Exaggerations will be revenged in human physiology.
Clean and vigorous children are jetted and conceiv'd only in those communities where the models
of natural forms are public every day. Great genius and the people of these States must never
be demean'd to romances. As soon as histories are properly told, no more need of romances.

The great poets are to be known by the absence in them of tricks, and by the justification
of perfect personal candor. All faults may be forgiven of him who has perfect candor. Henceforth
let no man of us lie, for we have seen that openness wins the inner and outer world, and that
there is no single exception, and that never since our earth gather'd itself in a mass have
deceit or subterfuge or prevarication attracted its smallest particle or the faintest tinge
of a shade--and that through the enveloping wealth and rank of a state, or the whole republic
of states, a sneak or sly person shall be discover'd and despised--and that the soul has never
once been fool'd and never can be fool'd--and thrift without the loving nod of the soul is
only a foetid puff--and there never grew up in any of the continents of the globe, nor upon
any planet or satellite, nor in that condition which precedes the birth of babes, nor at any
time during the changes of life, nor in any stretch of abeyance or action of vitality, nor
in any process of formation or reformation anywhere, a being whose instinct hated the truth.

Extreme caution or prudence, the soundest organic health, large hope and comparison and fondness
for women and children, large alimentiveness and destuctiveness and causality, with a perfect
sense of the oneness of nature, and the propriety of the same spirit applied to human affairs,
are called up of the float of the brain of the world to be parts of the greatest poet from
his birth out of his mother's womb, and from her birth out of her mother's. Caution seldom
goes far enough. It has been thought that the prudent citizen was the citizen who applied himself
to solid gains, and did well for himself and for his family, and completed a lawful life without
debt or crime. The greatest poet sees and admits these economies as he sees the economies of
food and sleep, but has higher notions of prudence than to think he gives much when he gives
a few slight attentions at the latch of the gate. The premises of the prudence of life are
not the hospitality of it, or the ripeness and harvest of it. Beyond the independence of a
little sum laid aside for burial-money, and of a few clap-boards around and shingles overhead
on a lot of American soil own'd, and the easy dollars that supply the year's plain clothing
and meals, the melancholy prudence of the abandonment of such a great being as a man is, to
the toss and pallor of years of money-making, with all their scorching days and icy nights,
and all their stifling deceits and underhand dodgings, or infinitesimals of parlors, or shameless
stuffing while others starve, and all the loss of the bloom and odor of the earth, and of the
flowers and atmosphere, and of the sea, and of the true taste of the women and men you pass
or have to do with in youth or middle age, and the issuing sickness and desperate revolt at
the close of a life without elevation or naivety, (even if you have achiev'd a secure 10,000
a year, or election to Congress or the Governorship,) and the ghastly chatter of a death without
serenity or majesty, is the great fraud upon modern civilization and forethought, blotching
the surface and system which civilization undeniably drafts, and moistening with tears the
immense features it spreads and spreads with such velocity before the reach'd kisses of the soul.

Ever the right explanation remains to be made about prudence. The prudence of the mere wealth
and respectability of the most esteem'd life appears too faint for the eye to observe at all,
when little and large alike drop quietly aside at the thought of the prudence suitable for
immortality. What is the wisdom that fills the thinness of a year, or seventy or eighty years--to
the wisdom spaced out by ages, and coming back at a certain time with strong reinforcements
and rich presents, and the clear faces of wedding-guests as far as you can look, in every direction,
running gaily toward you? Only the soul is of itself--all else has reference to what ensues.
All that a person does or thinks is of consequence. Nor can the push of charity or personal
force ever be anything else' than the profoundest reason, whether it brings argument to hand
or no. No specification is necessary--to add or subtract or divide is in vain. Little or big,
learn'd or unlearn'd, white or black, legal or illegal, sick or well, from the first inspiration
down the windpipe to the last expiration out of it, all that a male or female does that is
vigorous and benevolent and clean is so much sure profit to him or her in the unshakable order
of the universe, and through the whole scope of it forever. The prudence of the greatest poet
answers at last the craving and glut of the soul, puts off nothing, permits no let-up for its
own case or any case, has no particular sabbath or judgment day, divides not the living from
the dead, or the righteous from the unrighteous, is satisfied with the present, matches every
thought or act by its correlative, and knows no possible forgiveness or deputed atonement.

The direct trial of him who would be the greatest poet is to-day. If he does not flood himself
with the immediate age as with vast oceanic tides--if he be not himself the age transfigur'd,
and if to him is not open'd the eternity which gives similitude to all periods and locations
and processes, and animate and inanimate forms, and which is the bond of time, and rises up
from its inconceivable vagueness and infiniteness in the swimming shapes of to-day, and is
held by the ductile anchors of life, and makes the present spot the passage from what was to
what shall be, and commits itself to the representation of this wave of an hour, and this one
of the sixty beautiful children of the wave--let him merge in the general run, and wait his
development.

Still the final test of poems, or any character or work, remains. The prescient poet projects
himself centuries ahead, and judges performer or performance after the changes of time. Does
it live through them? Does it still hold on untired? Will the same style, and the direction
of genius to similar points, be satisfactory now? Have the marches of tens and hundreds and
thousands of years made willing detours to the right hand and the left hand for his sake? Is
he beloved long and long after he is buried? Does the young man think often of him? and the
young woman think often of him? and do the middleaged and the old think of him?

A great poem is for ages and ages in common, and for all degrees and complexions, and all departments
and sects, and for a woman as much as a man, and a man as much as a woman. A great poem is
no finish to a man or woman, but rather a beginning. Has any one fancied he could sit at last
under some due authority, and rest satisfied with explanations, and realize, and be content
and full? To no such terminus does the greatest poet bring--he brings neither cessation nor
shelter'd fatness and ease. The touch of him, like Nature, tells in action. Whom he takes he
takes with firm sure grasp into live regions previously unattain'd--thenceforward is no rest--they
see the space and ineffable sheen that turn the old spots and lights into dead vacuums. Now
there shall be a man cohered out of tumult and chaos --the elder encourages the younger and
shows him how--they two shall launch off fearlessly together till the new world fits an orbit
for itself, and looks unabash'd on the lesser orbits of the stars, and sweeps through the ceaseless
rings, and shall never be quiet again.

There will soon be no more priests. Their work is done. A new order shall arise, and they shall
be the priests of man, and every man shall be his own priest. They shall find their inspiration
in real objects to-day, symptoms of the past and future. They shall not deign to defend immortality
or God, or the perfection of things, or liberty, or the exquisite beauty and reality of the
soul. They shall arise in America, and be responded to from the remainder of the earth.

The English language befriends the grand American expression--it is brawny enough, and limber
and full enough. On the tough stock of a race who through all change of circumstance was never
without the idea of political liberty, which is the animus of all liberty, it has attracted
the terms of daintier and gayer and subtler and more elegant tongues. It is the powerful language
of resistance--it is the dialect of common sense. It is the speech of the proud and melancholy
races, and of all who aspire. It is the chosen tongue to express growth, faith, self-esteem,
freedom, justice, equality, friendliness, amplitude, prudence, decision, and courage. It is
the medium that shall wellnigh express the inexpressible.

No great literature, nor any like style of behavior or oratory, or social intercourse or household
arrangements, or public institutions, or the treatment by bosses of employ'd people, nor executive
detail, or detail of the army and navy, nor spirit of legislation or courts, or police or tuition
or architecture, or songs or amusements, can long elude the jealous and passionate instinct
of American standards. Whether or no the sign appears from the mouths of the people, it throbs
a live interrogation in every freeman's and freewoman's heart, after that which passes by,
or this built to remain. Is it uniform with my country? Are its disposals without ignominious
distinctions? Is it for the ever-growing communes of brothers and lovers, large, well united,
proud, beyond the old models, generous beyond all models? Is it something grown fresh out of
the fields, or drawn from the sea for use to me to-day here? I know that what answers for me,
an American, in Texas, Ohio, Canada, must answer for any individual or nation that serves for
a part of my materials. Does this answer? Is it for the nursing of the young of the republic?
Does it solve readily with the sweet milk of the nipples of the breasts of the Mother of Many
Children?

America prepares with Composure and good-will for the visitors that have sent word. It is not
intellect that is to be their warrant and welcome. The talented, the artist, the ingenious,
the editor, the statesman, the erudite, are not unappreciated--they fall in their place and
do their work. The soul of the nation also does its work. It rejects none, it permits all.
Only toward the like of itself will it advance half-way. An individual is as superb as a nation
when he has the qualities which make a superb nation. The soul of the largest and wealthiest
and proudest nation may well go half-way to meet that of its poets.

PREFACE, 1872 To As a Strong Bird on Pinions Free Now Thou Mother with thy Equal Brood, in
permanent edition.

The impetus and ideas urging me, for some years past, to an utterance, or attempt at utterance,
of New World songs, and an epic of Democracy, having already had their publish'd expression,
as well as I can expect to give it, in "Leaves of Grass," the present and any future pieces
from me are really but the surplusage forming after that volume, or the wake eddying behind
it. I fulfill'd in that an imperious conviction, and the commands of my nature as total and
irresistible as those which make the sea flow, or the globe revolve. But of this supplementary
volume, I confess I am not so certain. Having from early manhood abandon'd the business pursuits
and applications usual in my time and country, and obediently yielded myself up ever since
to the impetus mention'd, and to the work of expressing those ideas, it may be that mere habit
has got dominion of me, when there is no real need of saying anything further. But what is
life but an experiment? and mortality but an exercise? with reference to results beyond. And
so shall my poems be. If incomplete here, and superfluous there, n' importe--the earnest trial
and persistent exploration shall at least be mine, and other success failing shall be success
enough. I have been more anxious, anyhow, to suggest the songs of vital endeavor and manly
evolution, and furnish something for races of outdoor athletes, than to make perfect rhymes,
or reign in the parlors. I ventur'd from the beginning my own way, taking chances--and would
keep on venturing.

I will therefore not conceal from any persons, known or unknown to me, who take an interest
in the matter, that I have the ambition of devoting yet a few years to poetic composition.
The mighty present age! To absorb and express in poetry, anything of it--of its world --America--cities
and States--the years, the events of our Nineteeth century--the rapidity of movement--the violent
contrasts, fluctuations of light and shade, of hope and fear--the entire revolution made by
science in the poetic method--these great new underlying facts and new ideas rushing and spreading
everywhere;--truly a mighty age! As if in some colossal drama, acted again like those of old
under the open sun, the Nations of our time, and all the characteristics of Civilization, seem
hurrying, stalking across, flitting from wing to wing, gathering, closing up, toward some long-prepared,
most tremendous denouement. Not to conclude the infinite scenas of the race's life and toil
and happiness and sorrow, but haply that the boards be clear'd from oldest, worst incumbrances,
accumulations, and Man resume the eternal play anew, and under happier, freer auspices. To
me, the United States are important because in this colossal drama they are unquestionably
designated for the leading parts, for many a century to come. In them history and humanity
seem to seek to culminate. Our broad areas are even now the busy theatre of plots, passions,
interests, and suspended problems, compared to which the intrigues of the past of Europe, the
wars of dynasties, the scope of kings and kingdoms, and even the development of peoples, as
hitherto, exhibit scales of measurement comparatively narrow and trivial. And on these areas
of ours, as on a stage, sooner or later, something like an eclairissement of all the past civilization
of Europe and Asia is probably to be evolved.

The leading parts. Not to be acted, emulated here, by us again, that role till now foremost
in history--not to become a conqueror nation, or to achieve the glory of mere military, or
diplomatic, or commercial superiority--but to become the grand producing land of nobler men
and women--of copious races, cheerful, healthy, tolerant, free--to become the most friendly
nation, (the United States indeed)--the modern composite nation, form'd from all, with room
for all, welcoming all immigrants--accepting the work of our own interior development, as the
work fitly filling ages and ages to come;--the leading nation of peace, but neither ignorant
nor incapable of being the leading nation of war;--not the man's nation only, but the woman's
nation--a land of splendid mothers, daughters, sisters, wives.

Our America to-day I consider in many respects as but indeed a vast seething mass of materials,
ampler, better, (worse also,) than previously known--eligible to be used to carry towards its
crowning stage, and build for good, the great ideal nationality of the future, the nation of
the body and the soul,[32]--no limit here to land, help, opportunities, mines, products, demands,
supplies, etc.;--with (I think) our political organization, National, State, and Municipal,
permanently establish'd, as far ahead as we can calculate--but, so far, no social, literary,
religious, or esthetic organizations, consistent with our politics, or becoming to us--which
organizations can only come, in time, through great democratic ideas, religion--through science,
which now, like a new sunrise, ascending, begins to illuminate all--and through our own begotten
poets and literatuses. (The moral of a late well-written book on civilization seems to be that
the only real foundation-walls and bases--and also sine qua non afterward--of true and full
civilization, is the eligibility and certainty of boundless products for feeding, clothing,
sheltering everybody--perennial fountains of physical and domestic comfort, with intercommunication,
and with civil and ecclesiastical freedom--and that then the esthetic and mental business will
take care of itself. Well, the United States have establish'd this basis, and upon scales of
extent, variety, vitality, and continuity, rivaling those of Nature; and have now to proceed
to build an edifice upon it. I say this edifice is only to be fitly built by new literatures,
especially the poetic. I say a modern image-making creation is indispensable to fuse and express
the modern political and scientific creations--and then the trinity will be complete.)

When I commenced, years ago, elaborating the plan of my poems, and continued turning over that
plan, and shifting it in my mind through many years, (from the age of twenty-eight to thirty-five,)
experimenting much, and writing and abandoning much, one deep purpose underlay the others,
and has underlain it and its execution ever since--and that has been the religious purpose.
Amid many changes, and a formulation taking far different shape from what I at first supposed,
this basic purpose has never been departed from in the composition of my verses. Not of course
to exhibit itself in the old ways, as in writing hymns or psalms with an eye to the church-pew,
or to express conventional pietism, or the sickly yearnings of devotees, but in new ways, and
aiming at the widest sub-bases and inclusions of humanity, and tallying the fresh air of sea
and land. I will see, (said I to myself,) whether there is not, for my purposes as poet, a
religion, and a sound religious germenancy in the average human race, at least in their modern
development in the United States, and in the hardy common fiber and native yearnings and elements,
deeper and larger, and affording more profitable returns, than all mere sects or churches--as
boundless, joyous, and vital as Nature itself--a germenancy that has too long been unencouraged,
unsung, almost unknown. With science, the old theology of the East, long in its dotage, begins
evidently to die and disappear. But (to my mind) science--and may-be such will prove its principal
service--as evidently prepares the way for One indescribably grander--Time's young but perfect
offspring--the new theology--heir of the West--lusty and loving, and wondrous beautiful. For
America, and for today, just the same as any day, the supreme and final science is the science
of God--what we call science being only its minister--as Democracy is, or shall be also. And
a poet of America (I said) must fill himself with such thoughts, and chant his best out of
them. And as those were the convictions and aims, for good or bad, of "Leaves of Grass," they
are no less the intention of this volume. As there can be, in my opinion, no sane and complete
personality, nor any grand and electric nationality, without the stock element of religion
imbuing all the other elements, (like heat in chemistry, invisible itself, but the life of
all visible life,) so there can be no poetry worthy the name without that element behind all.
The time has certainly come to begin to discharge the idea of religion, in the United States,
from mere ecclesiasticism, and from Sundays and churches and church-going, and assign it to
that general position, chiefest, most indispensable, most exhilarating, to which the others
are to be adjusted, inside of all human character, and education, and affairs. The people,
especially the young men and women of America, must begin to learn that religion, (like poetry,)
is something far, far different from what they supposed. It is, indeed, too important to the
power and perpetuity of the New World to be consign'd any longer to the churches, old or new,
Catholic or Protestant--Saint this, or Saint that. It must be consign'd henceforth to democracy
en masse, and to literature. It must enter into the poems of the nation. It must make the nation.

The Four Years' War is over--and in the peaceful, strong, exciting, fresh occasions of to-day,
and of the future, that strange, sad war is hurrying even now to be forgotten. The camp, the
drill, the lines of sentries, the prisons, the hospitals--(ah! the hospitals!)--all have passed
away--all seem now like a dream. A new race, a young and lusty generation, already sweeps in
with oceanic currents, obliterating the war, and all its scars, its mounded graves, and all
its reminiscences of hatred, conflict, death. So let It be obliterated. I say the life of the
present and the future makes undeniable demands upon us each and all, south, north, east, west.
To help put the United States (even if only in imagination) hand in hand, in one unbroken circle
in a chant--to rouse them to the unprecedented grandeur of the part they are to play, and are
even now playing--to the thought of their great future, and the attitude conform'd to it--especially
their great esthetic, moral, scientific future, (of which their vulgar material and political
present is but as the preparatory tuning of instruments by an orchestra,) these, as hitherto,
are still, for me, among my hopes, ambitions.

"Leaves of Grass," already publish'd, is, in its intentions, the song of a great composite
democratic individual, male or female. And following on and amplifying the same purpose, I
suppose I have in my mind to run through the chants of this volume, (if ever completed,) the
thread-voice, more or less audible, of an aggregated, inseparable, unprecedented, vast, composite,
electric democratic nationality.

Purposing, then, to still fill out, from time to time through years to come, the following
volume, (unless prevented,) I conclude this preface to the first instalment of it, pencil'd
in the open air, on my fifty-third birth-day, by wafting to you, dear reader, whoever you are,
(from amid the fresh scent of the grass, the pleasant coolness of the forenoon breeze, the
lights and shades of tree-boughs silently dappling and playing around me, and the notes of
the cat-bird for undertone and accompaniment,) my true good-will and love. W. W. Washington,
D. C., May 31, 1872.

Note:

[32] The problems of the achievements of this crowning stage through future first-class National
Singers, Orators, Artists, and others--of creating in literature an imaginative New World,
the correspondent and counterpart of the current Scientific and Political New Worlds,--and
the perhaps distant, but still delightful prospect, (for our children, if not in our own day,)
of delivering America, and, indeed, all Christian lands everywhere, from the thin moribund
and watery, but appallingly extensive nuisance of conventional poetry--by putting something
really alive and substantial in its place--I have undertaken to grapple with, and argue, in
the preceding "Democratic Vistas."

PREFACE, 1876 To the two-volume Centennial Edition of Leaves of Grass and Two Rivulets.

At the eleventh hour, under grave illness, I gather up the pieces of prose and poetry left
over since publishing, a while since, my first and main volume, "Leaves or Grass"--pieces,
here, some new, some old-- nearly all of them (sombre as many are, making this almost death's
book) composed in by-gone atmospheres of perfect health--and preceded by the freshest collection,
the little "Two Rivulets," now send them out, embodied in the present melange, partly as my
contribution and outpouring to celebrate, in some sort, the feature of the time, the first
centennial of our New World nationality--and then as chyle and nutriment to that moral, indissoluble
union, equally representing all, and the mother of many coming centennials.

And e'en for flush and proof of our America--for reminder, just as much, or more, in moods
of towering pride and joy, I keep my special chants of death and immortality[33] to stamp the
coloring-finish of all, present and past. For terminus and temperer to all, they were originally
written; and that shall be their office at the last.

For some reason--not explainable or definite to my own mind, yet secretly pleasing and satisfactory
to it--I have not hesitated to embody in, and run through the volume, two altogether distinct
veins, or strata--politics for one, and for the other, the pensive thought of immortality.
Thus, too, the prose and poetic, the dual forms of the present book. The volume, therefore,
after its minor episodes, probably divides into these two, at first sight far diverse, veins
of topic and treatment. Three points, in especial, have become very dear to me, and all through
I seek to make them again and again, in many forms and repetitions, as will be seen: 1. That
the true growth-characteristics of the democracy of the New World are henceforth to radiate
in superior literary, artistic and religious expressions, far more than in its republican forms,
universal suffrage, and frequent elections, (though these are unspeakably important.) 2. That
the vital political mission of the United States is, to practically solve and settle the problem
of two sets of rights--the fusion, thorough compatibility and junction of individual State
prerogatives, with the indispensable necessity of centrality and Oneness--the national identity
power--the sovereign Union, relentless, permanently comprising all, and over all, and in that
never yielding an inch: then 3d. Do we not, amid a general malaria of fogs and vapors, our
day, unmistakably see two pillars of promise, with grandest, indestructible indications--one,
that the morbid facts of American politics and society everywhere are but passing incidents
and flanges of our unbounded impetus of growth? weeds, annuals, of the rank, rich soil--not
central, enduring, perennial things? The other, that all the hitherto experience of the States,
their first century, has been but preparation, adolescence--and that this Union is only now
and henceforth, (i.e., since the secession war,) to enter on its full democratic career?

Of the whole, poems and prose, (not attending at all to chronological order, and with original
dates and passing allusions in the heat and impression of the hour, left shuffled in, and undisturb'd,)
the chants of "Leaves of Grass," my former volume, yet serve as the indispensable deep soil,
or basis, out of which, and out of which only, could come the roots and stems more definitely
indicated by these later pages. (While that volume radiates physiology alone, the present one,
though of the like origin in the main, more palpably doubtless shows the pathology which was
pretty sure to come in time from the other.)

In that former and main volume, composed in the flush of my health and strength, from the age
of 30 to 50 years, I dwelt on birth and life, clothing my ideas in pictures, days, transactions
of my time, to give them positive place, identity--saturating them with that vehemence of pride
and audacity of freedom necessary to loosen the mind of still-to-be-form'd America from the
accumulated folds, the superstitions, and all the long, tenacious and stifling anti-democratic
authorities of the Asiatic and European past--my enclosing purport being to express, above
all artificial regulation and aid, the eternal bodily composite, cumulative, natural character
of one's self.[34]

Estimating the American Union as so far, and for some time to come, in its yet formative condition,
I bequeath poems and essays as nutriment and influences to help truly assimilate and harden,
and especially to furnish something toward what the States most need of all, and which seems
to me yet quite unsupplied in literature, namely, to show them, or begin to show them, themselves
distinctively, and what they are for. For though perhaps the main points of all ages and nations
are points of resemblance, and, even while granting evolution, are substantially the same,
there are some vital things in which this Republic, as to its individualities, and as a compacted
Nation, is to specially stand forth, and culminate modern humanity. And these are the very
things it least morally and mentally knows--(though, curiously enough, it is at the same time
faithfully acting upon them.)

I count with such absolute certainty on the great future of the United States--different from,
though founded on, the past--that I have always invoked that future, and surrounded myself
with it, before or while singing my songs. (As ever, all tends to followings--America, too,
is a prophecy. What, even of the best and most successful, would be justified by itself alone?
by the present, or the material ostent alone? Of men or States, few realize how much they live
in the future. That, rising like pinnacles, gives its main significance to all You and I are
doing to-day. Without it, there were little meaning in lands or poems--little purport in human
lives. All ages, all Nations and States, have been such prophecies. But where any former ones
with prophecy so broad, so clear, as our times, our lands--as those of the West?)

Without being a scientist, I have thoroughly adopted the conclusions of the great savants and
experimentalists of our time, and of the last hundred years, and they have interiorly tinged
the chyle of all my verse, for purposes beyond. Following the modern spirit, the real poems
of the present, ever solidifying and expanding into the future, must vocalize the vastness
and splendor and reality with which scientism has invested man and the universe, (all that
is called creation) and must henceforth launch humanity into new orbits, consonant, with that
vastness, splendor, and reality, (unknown to the old poems,) like new systems of orbs, balanced
upon themselves, revolving in limitless space, more subtle than the stars. Poetry, so largely
hitherto and even at present wedded to children's tales, and to mere amorousness, upholstery
and superficial rhyme, will have to accept, and, while not denying the past, nor the themes
of the past, will be revivified by this tremendous innovation, the kosmic spirit, which must
henceforth, in my opinion, be the background and underlying impetus, more or less visible,
of all first-class songs.

Only, (for me, at any rate, in all my prose and poetry,) joyfully accepting modern science,
and loyally following it without the slightest hesitation, there remains ever recognized still
a higher flight, a higher fact, the eternal soul of man, (of all else too,) the spiritual,
the religious--which it is to be the greatest office of scientism, in my opinion, and of future
poetry also, to free from fables, crudities and superstitions, and launch forth in renew'd
faith and scope a hundred fold. To me, the worlds of religiousness, of the conception of the
divine, and of the ideal, though mainly latent, are just as absolute in humanity and the universe
as the world of chemistry, or anything in the objective worlds. To me

      The prophet and the bard,
    Shall yet maintain themselves--in higher circles yet,
    Shall mediate to the modern, to democracy--interpret yet to them,
      God and eidolons.

To me, the crown of savantism is to be, that it surely opens the way for a more splendid theology,
and for ampler and diviner songs. No year, nor even century, will settle this. There is a phase
of the real, lurking behind the real, which it is all for. There is also in the intellect of
man, in time, far in prospective recesses, a judgment, a last appellate court, which will settle
it.

In certain parts in these flights, or attempting to depict or suggest them, I have not been
afraid of the charge of obscurity, in either of my two volumes-because human thought, poetry
or melody, must leave dim escapes and outlets-must possess a certain fluid, aerial character,
akin to space itself, obscure to those of little or no imagination,--but indispensable to the
highest purposes. Poetic style, when address'd to the soul, is less definite form, outline,
sculpture, and becomes vista, music, half-tints, and even less than half-tints. True, it may
be architecture; but again it may be the forest wild-wood, or the best effect thereof, at twilight,
the waving oaks and cedars in the wind, and the impalpable odor.

Finally, as I have lived in fresh lands, inchoate, and in a revolutionary age, future-founding,
I have felt to identify the points of that age, these lands, in my recitatives, altogether
in my own way. Thus my form has strictly grown from my purports and facts, and is the analogy
of them. Within my time the United States have emerged from nebulous vagueness and suspense,
to full orbic, (though varied,) decision--have done the deeds and achiev'd the triumphs of
half a score of centuries--and are henceforth to enter upon their real history the way being
now, (i.e. since the result of the secession war,) clear'd of death-threatening impedimenta,
and the free areas around and ahead of us assured and certain, which were not so before--(the
past century being but preparations, trial voyages and experiments of the ship, before her
starting out upon deep water.)

In estimating my volumes, the world's current times and deeds, and their spirit, must be first
profoundly estimated. Out of the hundred years just ending, (1776-1876,) with their genesis
of inevitable wilful events, and new experiments and introductions, and many unprecedented
things of war and peace, (to be realized better, perhaps only realized, at the remove of a
century hence;) out of that stretch of time, and especially out of the immediately preceding
twenty-five years, (1850-'75,) with all their rapid changes, innovations, and audacious movements-and
bearing their own inevitable wilful birth-marks--the experiments of my poems too have found
genesis.

W. W.

Notes:

[33] PASSAGE TO INDIA.--As in some ancient legend-play, to close the plot and the hero's career,
there is a farewell gathering on ship's deck and on shore, a loosing of hawsers and ties, a
spreading of sails to the wind--a starting out on unknown seas, to fetch up no one knows whither--to
return no more--and the curtain falls, and there is the end of it--so I have reserv'd that
poem, with its cluster, to finish and explain much that, without them, would not be explain'd,
and to take leave, and escape for good, from all that has preceded them. (Then probably "Passage
to India," and its cluster, are but freer vent and fuller expression to what, from the first,
and so on throughout, more or less lurks in my writings, underneath every page, every line,
everywhere.)

I am not sure but the last inclosing sublimation of race or poem is, what it thinks of death.
After the rest has been comprehended and said, even the grandest--after those contributions
to mightiest nationality, or to sweetest song, or to the best personalism, male or female,
have been glean'd from the rich and varied themes of tangible life, and have been fully accepted
and sung, and the pervading fact of visible existence, with the duty it devolves, is rounded
and apparently completed, it still remains to be really completed by suffusing through the
whole and several, that other pervading invisible fact, so large a part, (is it not the largest
part?) of life here, combining the rest, and furnishing, for person or State, the only permanent
and unitary meaning to all, even the meanest life, consistently with the dignity of the universe,
in Time. As from the eligibility to this thought, and the cheerful conquest of this fact, flash
forth the first distinctive proofs of the soul, so to me, (extending it only a little further,)
the ultimate Democratic purports, the ethereal and spiritual ones, are to concentrate here,
and as fixed stars, radiate hence. For, in my opinion, it is no less than this idea of immortality,
above all other ideas, that is to enter into, and vivify, and give crowning religious stamp,
to democracy in the New World.

It was originally my intention, after chanting in "Leaves of Grass" the songs of the body and
existence, to then compose a further, equally needed volume, based on those convictions of
perpetuity and conservation which, enveloping all precedents, make the unseen soul govern absolutely
at last. I meant, while in a sort continuing the theme of my first chants, to shift the slides,
and exhibit the problem and paradox of the same ardent and fully appointed personality entering
the sphere of the resistless gravitation of spiritual law, and with cheerful face estimating
death, not at all as the cessation, but as somehow what I feel it must be, the entrance upon
by far the greatest part of existence, and something that life is at least as much for, as
it is for itself. But the full construction of such a work is beyond my powers, and must remain
for some bard in the future. The physical and the sensuous, in themselves or in their immediate
continuations, retain holds upon me which I think are never entirely releas'd; and those holds
I have not only not denied, but hardly wish'd to weaken.

Meanwhile, not entirely to give the go-by to my original plan, and far more to avoid a mark'd
hiatus in it, than to entirely fulfil it, I end my books with thoughts, or radiations from
thoughts, on death, immortality, and a free entrance into the spiritual world. In those thoughts,
in a sort, I make the first steps or studies toward the mighty theme, from the point of view
necessitated by my foregoing poems, and by modern science. In them I also seek to set the key-stone
to my democracy's enduring arch. I recollate them now, for the press, in order to partially
occupy and offset days of strange sickness, and the heaviest affliction and bereavement of
my life; and I fondly please myself with the notion of leaving that cluster to you, O unknown
reader of the future, as "something to remember me by," more especially than all else. Written
in former days of perfect health, little did I think the pieces had the purport that now, under
present circumstances, opens to me.

[As I write these lines, May 31, 1875, it is again early summer, --again my birth-day--now
my fifty-sixth. Amid the outside beauty and freshness, the sunlight and verdure of the delightful
season, O how different the moral atmosphere amid which I now revise this Volume, from the
jocund influence surrounding the growth and advent of "Leaves of Grass." I occupy myself, arranging
these pages for publication, still envelopt in thoughts of the death two years since of my
dear Mother, the most perfect and magnetic character, the rarest combination of practical,
moral and spiritual, and the least selfish, of all and any I have ever known--and by me O so
much the most deeply loved--and also under the physical affliction of a tedious attack of paralysis,
obstinately lingering and keeping its hold upon me, and quite suspending all bodily activity
and comfort.]

Under these influences, therefore, I still feel to keep "Passage to India" for last words even
to this centennial dithyramb. Not as, in antiquity, at highest festival of Egypt, the noisome
skeleton of death was sent on exhibition to the revelers, for zest and shadow to the occasion's
joy and light--but as the marble statue of the normal Greeks at Elis, suggesting death in the
form of a beautiful and perfect young man, with closed eyes, leaning on an inverted torch--emblem
of rest and aspiration after action--of crown and point which all lives and poems should steadily
have reference to, namely, the justified and noble termination of our identity, this grade
of it, and outlet-preparation to another grade.

[34] Namely, a character, making most of common and normal elements, to the superstructure
of which not only the precious accumulations of the learning and experiences of the Old World,
and the settled social and municipal necessities and current requirements, so long a-building,
shall still faithfully contribute, but which at its foundations and carried up thence, and
receiving its impetus from the democratic spirit, and accepting its gauge in all departments
from the democratic formulas, shall again directly be vitalized by the perennial influences
of Nature at first hand, and the old heroic stamina of Nature, the strong air of prairie and
mountain, the dash of the briny sea, the primary antiseptics--of the passions, in all their
fullest heat and potency, of courage, rankness, amativeness, and of immense pride. Not to lose
at all, therefore, the benefits of artificial progress and civilization, but to re-occupy for
Western tenancy the oldest though ever-fresh fields, and reap from them the savage and sane
nourishment indispensable to a hardy nation, and the absence of which, threatening to become
worse and worse, is the most serious lack and defect to-day of our New World literature.

Not but what the brawn of "Leaves of Grass" is, I hope, thoroughly spiritualized everywhere,
for final estimate, but, from the very subjects, the direct effect is a sense of the life,
as it should be, of flesh and blood, and physical urge, and animalism. While there are other
themes, and plenty of abstract thoughts and poems in the volume--while I have put in it passing
and rapid but actual glimpses of the great struggle between the nation and the slave-power,
(1861-'65,) as the fierce and bloody panorama of that contest unroll'd itself: while the whole
book, indeed, revolves around that four years' war, which, as I was in the midst of it, becomes,
in "Drum-Taps," pivotal to the rest entire--and here and there, before and afterward, not a
few episodes and speculations--that--namely, to make a type-portrait for living, active, worldly,
healthy personality, objective as well as subjective, joyful and potent, and modern and free,
distinctively for the use of the United States, male and female, through the long future--has
been, I say, my general object. (Probably, indeed, the whole of these varied songs, and all
my writings, both volumes, only ring changes in some sort, on the ejaculation, How vast, how
eligible, how joyful, how real, is a human being, himself or herself.)

Though from no definite plan at the time, I see now that I have unconsciously sought, by indirections
at least as much as directions, to express the whirls and rapid growth and intensity of the
United States, the prevailing tendency and events of the Nineteenth century, and largely the
spirit of the whole current world, my time; for I feel that I have partaken of that spirit,
as I have been deeply interested in all those events, the closing of long-stretch'd eras and
ages, and, illustrated in the history of the United States, the opening of larger ones. (The
death of President Lincoln, for instance, fitly, historically closes, in the civilization of
feudalism, many old influences--drops on them, suddenly, a vast, gloomy, as it were, separating
curtain.)

Since I have been ill, (1873-'74-'75,) mostly without serious pain, and with plenty of time
and frequent inclination to judge my poems, (never composed with eye on the book-market, nor
for fame, nor for any pecuniary profit,) I have felt temporary depression more than once, for
fear that in "Leaves of Grass" the moral parts were not sufficiently pronounced. But in my
clearest and calmest moods I have realized that as those "Leaves," all and several, surely
prepare the way for, and necessitate morals, and are adjusted to them, just the same as Nature
does and is, they are what, consistently with my plan, they must and probably should be. (In
a certain sense, while the Moral is the purport and last intelligence of all Nature, there
is absolutely nothing of the moral in the works, or laws, or shows of Nature. Those only lead
inevitably to it--begin and necessitate it.)

Then I meant "Leaves of Grass," as publish'd, to be the Poem of average Identity, (of yours,
whoever you are, now reading these lines.) A man is not greatest as victor in war, nor inventor
or explorer, nor even in science, or in his intellectual or artistic capacity, or exemplar
in some vast benevolence. To the highest democratic view, man is most acceptable in living
well the practical life and lot which happens to him as ordinary farmer, sea-farer, mechanic,
clerk, laborer, or driver--upon and from which position as a central basis or pedestal, while
performing its labors, and his duties as citizen, son, husband, father and employ'd person,
he preserves his physique, ascends, developing, radiating himself in other regions--and especially
where and when, (greatest of all, and nobler than the proudest mere genius or magnate in any
field,) he fully realizes the conscience, the spiritual, the divine faculty, cultivated well,
exemplified in all his deeds and words, through life, uncompromising to the end--a flight loftier
than any of Homer's or Shakspere's--broader than all poems and bibles--namely, Nature's own,
and in the midst of it, Yourself, your own Identity, body and soul. (All serves, helps--but
in the centre of all, absorbing all, giving, for your purpose, the only meaning and vitality
to all, master or mistress of all, under the law, stands Yourself.) To sing the Song of that
law of average Identity, and of Yourself, consistently with the divine law of the universal,
is a main intention of those "Leaves."

Something more may be added--for, while I am about it, I would make a full confession. I also
sent out "Leaves of Grass" to arouse and set flowing in men's and women's hearts, young and
old, endless streams of living, pulsating love and friendship, directly from them to myself,
now and ever. To this terrible, irrepressible yearning, (surely more or less down underneath
in most human souls)--this never-satisfied appetite for sympathy, and this boundless offering
of sympathy--this universal democratic comradeship-this old, eternal, yet ever-new interchange
of adhesiveness, so fitly emblematic of America--I have given in that book, undisguisedly,
declaredly, the openest expression. Besides, important as they are in my purpose as emotional
expressions for humanity, the special meaning of the "Calamus" cluster of "Leaves of Grass,"
(and more or less running through the book, and cropping out in "Drum-Taps,") mainly resides
in its political significance. In my opinion, it is by a fervent, accepted development of comradeship,
the beautiful and sane affection of man for man, latent in all the young fellows, north and
south, east and west--it is by this, I say, and by what goes directly and indirectly along
with it, that the United States of the future, (I cannot too often repeat,) are to be most
effectually welded together, intercalated, anneal'd into a living union.

Then, for enclosing clue of all, it is imperatively and ever to be borne in mind that "Leaves
of Grass" entire is not to be construed as an intellectual or scholastic effort or poem mainly,
but more as a radical utterance out of the Emotions and the Physique--an utterance adjusted
to, perhaps born of, Democracy and the Modern--in its very nature regardless of the old conventions,
and, under the great laws, following only its own impulses.

POETRY TO-DAY IN AMERICA

SHAKSPERE--THE FUTURE

Strange as it may seem, the topmost proof of a race is its own born poetry. The presence of
that, or the absence, each tells its story. As the flowering rose or lily, as the ripened fruit
to a tree, the apple or the peach, no matter how fine the trunk, or copious or rich the branches
and foliage, here waits sine qua non at last. The stamp of entire and finished greatness to
any nation, to the American Republic among the rest, must be sternly withheld till it has put
what it stands for in the blossom of original, first-class poems. No imitations will do.

And though no esthetik worthy the present condition or future certainties of the New World
seems to have been outlined in men's minds, or has been generally called for, or thought needed,
I am clear that until the United States have just such definite and native expressers in the
highest artistic fields, their mere political, geographical, wealth-forming, and even intellectual
eminence, however astonishing and predominant, will constitute but a more and more expanded
and well-appointed body, and perhaps brain, with little or no soul. Sugar-coat the grim truth
as we may, and ward off with outward plausible words, denials, explanations, to the mental
inward perception of the land this blank is plain; a barren void exists. For the meanings and
maturer purposes of these States are not the constructing of a new world of politics merely,
and physical comforts for the million, but even more determinedly, in range with science and
the modern, of a new world of democratic sociology and imaginative literature. If the latter
were not establish'd for the States, to form their only permanent tie and hold, the first-named
would be of little avail.

With the poems of a first-class land are twined, as weft with warp, its types of personal character,
of individuality, peculiar, native, its own physiognomy, man's and woman's, its own shapes,
forms, and manners, fully justified under the eternal laws of all forms, all manners, all times.
The hour has come for democracy in America to inaugurate itself in the two directions specified--autochthonic
poems and personalities--born expressers of itself, its spirit alone, to radiate in subtle
ways, not only in art, but the practical and familiar, in the transactions between employers
and employed persons, in business and wages, and sternly in the army and navy, and revolutionizing
them. I find nowhere a scope profound enough, and radical and objective enough, either for
aggregates or individuals. The thought and identity of a poetry in America to fill, and worthily
fill, the great void, and enhance these aims, electrifying all and several, involves the essence
and integral facts, real and spiritual, of the whole land, the whole body. What the great sympathetic
is to the congeries of bones, joints, heart, fluids, nervous system and vitality, constituting,
launching forth in time and space a human being--aye, an immortal soul--such relation, and
no less, holds true poetry to the single personality, or to the nation.

Here our thirty-eight States stand to-day, the children of past precedents, and, young as they
are, heirs of a very old estate. One or two points we will consider, out of the myriads presenting
themselves. The feudalism, of the British Islands, illustrated by Shakspere--and by his legitimate
followers, Walter Scott and Alfred Tennyson--with all its tyrannies, superstitions, evils,
had most superb and heroic permeating veins, poems, manners; even its errors fascinating. It
almost seems as if only that feudalism in Europe, like slavery in our own South, could outcrop
types of tallest, noblest personal character yet--strength and devotion and love better than
elsewhere--invincible courage, generosity, aspiration, the spines of all. Here is where Shakspere
and the others I have named perform a service incalculably precious to our America. Politics,
literature, and everything else, centers at last in perfect personnel, (as democracy is to
find the same as the rest;) and here feudalism is unrival'd--here the rich and highest-rising
lessons it bequeaths us--a mass of foreign nutriment, which we are to work over, and popularize
and enlarge, and present again in our own growths.

Still there are pretty grave and anxious drawbacks, jeopardies, fears. Let us give some reflections
on the subject, a little fluctuating, but starting from one central thought, and returning
there again. Two or three curious results may plow up. As in the astronomical laws, the very
power that would seem most deadly and destructive turns out to be latently conservative of
longest, vastest future births and lives. We will for once briefly examine the just-named authors
solely from a Western point of view. It may be, indeed, that we shall use the sun of English
literature, and the brightest current stars of his system, mainly as pegs to hang some cogitations
on, for home inspection.

As depicter and dramatist of the passions at their stormiest outstretch, though ranking high,
Shakspere (spanning the arch wide enough) is equaled by several, and excelled by the best old
Greeks, (as Eschylus.) But in portraying mediaeval European lords and barons, the arrogant
port, so dear to the inmost human heart, (pride! pride! dearest, perhaps, of all--touching
us, too, of the States closest of all--closer than love,) he stands alone, and I do not wonder
he so witches the world.

From first to last, also, Walter Scott and Tennyson, like Shakspere, exhale that principle
of caste which we Americans have come on earth to destroy. Jefferson's verdict on the Waverley
novels was that they turned and condensed brilliant but entirely false lights and glamours
over the lords, ladies, and aristocratic institutes of Europe, with all their measureless infamies,
and then left the bulk of the suffering, down-trodden people contemptuously in the shade. Without
stopping to answer this hornet-stinging criticism, or to repay any part of the debt of thanks
I owe, in common with every American, to the noblest, healthiest, cheeriest romancer that ever
lived, I pass on to Tennyson, his works.

Poetry here of a very high (perhaps the highest) order of verbal melody, exquisitely clean
and pure, and almost always perfumed, like the tuberose, to an extreme of sweetness--sometimes
not, however, but even then a camellia of the hot-house, never a common flower--the verse of
inside elegance and high-life; and yet preserving amid all its super-delicatesse a smack of
outdoors and outdoor folk. The old Norman lordhood quality here, too, crossed with that Saxon
fiber from which twain the best current stock of England springs--poetry that revels above
all things in traditions of knights and chivalry, and deeds of derring-do. The odor of English
social life in its highest range--a melancholy, affectionate, very manly, but dainty breed--pervading
the pages like an invisible scent; the idleness, the traditions, the mannerisms, the stately
ennui; the yearning of love, like a spinal marrow, inside of all; the costumes brocade and
satin; the old houses and furniture--solid oak, no mere veneering--the moldy secrets everywhere;
the verdure, the ivy on the walls, the moat, the English landscape outside, the buzzing fly
in the sun inside the window pane. Never one democratic page; nay, not a line, not a word;
never free and naive poetry, but involved, labored, quite sophisticated--even when the theme
is ever so simple or rustic, (a shell, a bit of sedge, the commonest love-passage between a
lad and lass,) the handling of the rhyme all showing the scholar and conventional gentleman;
showing the laureate too, the attache of the throne, and most excellent, too; nothing better
through the volumes than the dedication "to the Queen" at the beginning, and the other fine
dedication, "these to his memory" (Prince Albert's,) preceding "Idylls of the King."

Such for an off-hand summary of the mighty three that now, by the women, men, and young folk
of the fifty millions given these States by their late census, have been and are more read
than all others put together.

We hear it said, both of Tennyson and another current leading literary illustrator of Great
Britain, Carlyle--as of Victor Hugo in France--that not one of them is personally friendly
or admirant toward America; indeed, quite the reverse. N'importe. That they (and more good
minds than theirs) cannot span the vast revolutionary arch thrown by the United States over
the centuries, fixed in the present, launched to the endless future; that they cannot stomach
the high-life-below-stairs coloring all our poetic and genteel social status so far--the measureless
viciousness of the great radical Republic, with its ruffianly nominations and elections; its
loud, ill-pitched voice, utterly regardless whether the verb agrees with the nominative; its
fights, errors, eructations, repulsions, dishonesties, audacities; those fearful and varied
and long-continued storm and stress stages (so offensive to the well-regulated college-bred
mind) wherewith Nature, history, and time block out nationalities more powerful than the past,
and to upturn it and press on to the future;--that they cannot understand and fathom all this,
I say, is it to be wondered at? Fortunately, the gestation of our thirty-eight empires (and
plenty more to come) proceeds on its course, on scales of area and velocity immense and absolute
as the globe, and, like the globe itself, quite oblivious even of great poets and thinkers.
But we can by no means afford to be oblivious of them.

The same of feudalism, its castles, courts, etiquettes, personalities. However they, or the
spirits of them hovering in the air, might scowl and glower at such removes as current Kansas
or Kentucky life and forms, the latter may by no means repudiate or leave out the former. Allowing
all the evil that it did, we get, here and today, a balance of good out of its reminiscence
almost beyond price.

Am I content, then, that the general interior chyle of our republic should be supplied and
nourish'd by wholesale from foreign and antagonistic sources such as these? Let me answer that
question briefly:

Years ago I thought Americans ought to strike out separate, and have expressions of their own
in highest literature. I think so still, and more decidedly than ever. But those convictions
are now strongly temper'd by some additional points, (perhaps the results of advancing age,
or the reflection of invalidism.) I see that this world of the West, as part of all, fuses
inseparably with the East, and with all, as time does--the ever new yet old, old human race--"the
same subject continued," as the novels of our grandfathers had it for chapter-heads. If we
are not to hospitably receive and complete the inaugurations of the old civilizations, and
change their small scale to the largest, broadest scale, what on earth are we for?

The currents of practical business in America, the rude, coarse, tussling facts of our lives,
and all their daily experiences, need just the precipitation and tincture of this entirely
different fancy world of lulling, contrasting, even feudalistic, anti-republican poetry and
romance. On the enormous outgrowth of our unloos'd individualities, and the rank, self-assertion
of humanity here, may well fall these grace-persuading, recherche influences. We first require
that individuals and communities shall be free; then surely comes a time when it is requisite
that they shall not be too free. Although to such results in the future I look mainly for a
great poetry native to us, these importations till then will have to be accepted, such as they
are, and thankful they are no worse. The inmost spiritual currents of the present time curiously
revenge and check their own compell'd tendency to democracy, and absorption in it, by mark'd
leanings to the past--by reminiscences in poems, plots, operas, novels, to a far-off, contrary,
deceased world, as if they dreaded the great vulgar gulf-tides of to-day. Then what has been
fifty centuries growing, working in, and accepted as crowns and apices for our kind, is not
going to be pulled down and discarded in a hurry.

It is, perhaps, time we paid our respects directly to the honorable party, the real object
of these preambles. But we must make reconnaissance a little further still. Not the least part
of our lesson were to realize the curiosity and interest of friendly foreign experts,[35] and
how our situation looks to them. "American poetry," says the London "Times,"[36] is the poetry
of apt pupils, but it is afflicted from first to last with a fatal want of raciness. Bryant
has been long passed as a poet by Professor Longfellow; but in Longfellow, with all his scholarly
grace and tender feeling, the defect is more apparent than it was in Bryant. Mr. Lowell can
overflow with American humor when politics inspire his muse; but in the realm of pure poetry
he is no more American than a Newdigate prize-man. Joaquin Miller's verse has fluency and movement
and harmony, but as for the thought, his songs of the sierras might as well have been written
in Holland."

Unless in a certain very slight contingency, the "Times" says: "American verse, from its earliest
to its latest stages, seems an exotic, with an exuberance of gorgeous blossom, but no principle
of reproduction. That is the very note and test of its inherent want. Great poets are tortured
and massacred by having their flowers of fancy gathered and gummed down in the hortus siccus
of an anthology. American poets show better in an anthology than in the collected volumes of
their works. Like their audience they have been unable to resist the attraction of the vast
orbit of English literature. They may talk of the primeval forest, but it would generally be
very hard from internal evidence to detect that they were writing on the banks of the Hudson
rather than on those of the Thames. ....In fact, they have caught the English tone and air
and mood only too faithfully, and are accepted by the superficially cultivated English intelligence
as readily as if they were English born. Americans themselves confess to a certain disappointment
that a literary curiosity and intelligence so diffused [as in the United States] have not taken
up English literature at the point at which America has received it, and carried it forward
and developed it with an independent energy. But like reader like poet. Both show the effects
of having come into an estate they have not earned. A nation of readers has required of its
poets a diction and symmetry of form equal to that of an old literature like that of Great
Britain, which is also theirs. No ruggedness, however racy, would be tolerated by circles which,
however superficial their culture, read Byron and Tennyson."

The English critic, though a gentleman and a scholar, and friendly withal, is evidently not
altogether satisfied, (perhaps he is jealous,) and winds up by saying: "For the English language
to have been enriched with a national poetry which was not English but American, would have
been a treasure beyond price." With which, as whet and foil, we shall proceed to ventilate
more definitely certain no doubt willful opinions.

Leaving unnoticed at present the great masterpieces of the antique, or anything from the middle
ages, the prevailing flow of poetry for the last fifty or eighty years, and now at its height,
has been and is (like the music) an expression of mere surface melody, within narrow limits,
and yet, to give it its due, perfectly satisfying to the demands of the ear, of wondrous charm,
of smooth and easy delivery, and the triumph of technical art. Above all things it is fractional
and select. It shrinks with aversion from the sturdy, the universal, and the democratic.

The poetry of the future, (a phrase open to sharp criticism, and not satisfactory to me, but
significant, and I will use it)--the poetry of the future aims at the free expression of emotion,
(which means far, far more than appears at first,) and to arouse and initiate, more than to
define or finish. Like all modern tendencies, it has direct or indirect reference continually
to the reader, to you or me, to the central identity of everything, the mighty Ego. (Byron's
was a vehement dash, with plenty of impatient democracy, but lurid and introverted amid all
its magnetism; not at all the fitting, lasting song of a grand, secure, free, sunny race.)
It is more akin, likewise, to outside life and landscape, (returning mainly to the antique
feeling,) real sun and gale, and woods and shores--to the elements themselves--not sitting
at ease in parlor or library listening to a good tale of them, told in good rhyme. Character,
a feature far above style or polish--a feature not absent at any time, but now first brought
to the fore--gives predominant stamp to advancing poetry. Its born sister, music, already responds
to the same influences. "The music of the present, Wagner's, Gounod's, even the later Verdi's,
all tends toward this free expression of poetic emotion, and demands a vocalism totally unlike
that required for Rossini's splendid roulades, or Bellini's suave melodies."

Is there not even now, indeed, an evolution, a departure from the masters? Venerable and unsurpassable
after their kind as are the old works, and always unspeakably precious as studies, (for Americans
more than any other people,) is it too much to say that by the shifted combinations of the
modern mind the whole underlying theory of first-class verse has changed? "Formerly, during
the period term'd classic," says Sainte-Beuve, "when literature was govern'd by recognized
rules, he was considered the best poet who had composed the most perfect work, the most beautiful
poem, the most intelligible, the most agreeable to read, the most complete in every respect,--the
Aeneid, the Gerusalemme, a fine tragedy. To-day, something else is wanted. For us the greatest
poet is he who in his works most stimulates the reader's imagination and reflection, who excites
him the most himself to poetize.

The fatal defects our American singers labor under are subordination of spirit, an absence
of the concrete and of real patriotism, and in excess that modern esthetic contagion a queer
friend of mine calls the beauty disease. "The immoderate taste for beauty and art," says Charles
Baudelaire, "leads men into monstrous excesses. In minds imbued with a frantic greed for the
beautiful, all the balances of truth and justice disappear. There is a lust, a disease of the
art faculties, which eats up the moral like a cancer."

Of course, by our plentiful verse-writers there is plenty of service perform'd, of a kind.
Nor need we go far for a tally. We see, in every polite circle, a class of accomplished, good-natured
persons, ("society," in fact, could not get on without them,) fully eligible for certain problems,
times, and duties--to mix egg-nog, to mend the broken spectacles, to decide whether the stewed
eels shall precede the sherry or the sherry the stewed eels, to eke out Mrs. A. B.'s parlor-tableaux
with monk, Jew, lover, Puck, Prospero, Caliban, or what not, and to generally contribute and
gracefully adapt their flexibilities and talents, in those ranges, to the world's service.
But for real crises, great needs and pulls, moral or physical, they might as well have never
been born.

Or the accepted notion of a poet would appear to be a sort of male odalisque, singing or piano-playing
a kind of spiced ideas, second-hand reminiscences, or toying late hours at entertainments,
in rooms stifling with fashionable scent. I think I haven't seen a new-published, healthy,
bracing, simple lyric in ten years. Not long ago, there were verses in each of three fresh
monthlies, from leading authors, and in every one the whole central motif (perfectly serious)
was the melancholiness of a marriageable young woman who didn't get a rich husband, but a poor one!

Besides its tonic and al fresco physiology, relieving such as this, the poetry of the future
will take on character in a more important respect. Science, having extirpated the old stock-fables
and superstitions, is clearing a field for verse, for all the arts, and even for romance, a
hundred-fold ampler and more wonderful, with the new principles behind. Republicanism advances
over the whole world. Liberty, with Law by her side, will one day be paramount--will at any
rate be the central idea. Then only--for all the splendor and beauty of what has been, or the
polish of what is--then only will the true poets appear, and the true poems. Not the satin
and patchouly of today, not the glorification of the butcheries and wars of the past, nor any
fight between Deity on one side and somebody else on the other--not Milton, not even Shakspere's
plays, grand as they are. Entirely different and hitherto unknown Classes of men, being authoritatively
called for in imaginative literature, will certainly appear. What is hitherto most lacking,
perhaps most absolutely indicates the future. Democracy has been hurried on through time by
measureless tides and winds, resistless as the revolution of the globe, and as far-reaching
and rapid. But in the highest walks of art it has not yet had a single representative worthy
of it anywhere upon the earth.

Never had real bard a task more fit for sublime ardor and genius than to sing worthily the
songs these States have already indicated. Their origin, Washington, '76, the picturesqueness
of old times, the war of 1812 and the sea-fights; the incredible rapidity of movement and breadth
of area--to fuse and compact the South and North, the East and West, to express the native
forms, situations, scenes, from Montauk to California, and from the Saguenay to the Rio Grande--the
working out on such gigantic scales, and with such a swift and mighty play of changing light
and shade, of the great problems of man and freedom,--how far ahead of the stereotyped plots,
or gem-cutting, or tales of love, or wars of mere ambition! Our history is so full of spinal,
modern, germinal subjects--one above all. What the ancient siege of Illium, and the puissance
of Hector's and Agamemnon's warriors proved to Hellenic art and literature, and all art and
literature since, may prove the war of attempted secession of 1861-'65 to the future esthetics,
drama, romance, poems of the United States.

Nor could utility itself provide anything more practically serviceable to the hundred millions
who, a couple of generations hence, will inhabit within the limits just named, than the permeation
of a sane, sweet, autochthonous national poetry--must I say of a kind that does not now exist?
but which, I fully believe, will in time be supplied on scales as free as Nature's elements.
(It is acknowledged that we of the States are the most materialistic and money-making people
ever known. My own theory, while fully accepting this, is that we are the most emotional, spiritualistic,
and poetry-loving people also.)

Infinite are the new and orbic traits waiting to be launch'd forth in the firmament that is,
and is to be, America. Lately, I have wonder'd whether the last meaning of this cluster of
thirty-eight States is not only practical fraternity among themselves--the only real union,
(much nearer its accomplishment, too, than appears on the surface)--but for fraternity over
the whole globe--that dazzling, pensive dream of ages! Indeed, the peculiar glory of our lands,
I have come to see, or expect to see, not in their geographical or republican greatness, nor
wealth or products, nor military or naval power, nor special, eminent names in any department,
to shine with, or outshine, foreign special names in similar departments,--but more and more
in a vaster, saner, more surrounding Comradeship, uniting closer and closer not only the American
States, but all nations, and all humanity. That, O poets! is not that a theme worth chanting,
striving for? Why not fix your verses henceforth to the gauge of the round globe? the whole
race? Perhaps the most illustrious culmination of the modern may thus prove to be a signal
growth of joyous, more exalted bards of adhesiveness, identically one in soul, but contributed
by every nation, each after its distinctive kind. Let us, audacious, start it. Let the diplomats,
as ever, still deeply plan, seeking advantages, proposing treaties between governments, and
to bind them, on paper: what I seek is different, simpler. I would inaugurate from America,
for this purpose, new formulas--international poems. I have thought that the invisible root
out of which the poetry deepest in, and dearest to, humanity grows, is Friendship. I have thought
that both in patriotism and song (even amid their grandest shows past) we have adhered too
long to petty limits, and that the time has come to enfold the world.

Not only is the human and artificial world we have establish'd in the West a radical departure
from anything hitherto known--not only men and politics, and all that goes with them--but Nature
itself, in the main sense, its construction, is different. The same old font of type, of course,
but set up to a text never composed or issued before. For Nature consists not only in itself,
objectively, but at least just as much in its subjective reflection from the person, spirit,
age, looking at it, in the midst of it, and absorbing it--faithfully sends back the characteristic
beliefs of the time or individual--takes, and readily gives again, the physiognomy of any nation
or literature--falls like a great elastic veil on a face, or like the molding plaster on a statue.

What is Nature? What were the elements, the invisible backgrounds and eidolons of it, to Homer's
heroes, voyagers, gods? What all through the wanderings of Virgil's Aeneas? Then to Shakspere's
characters--Hamlet, Lear, the English-Norman kings, the Romans? What was Nature to Rousseau,
to Voltaire, to the German Goethe in his little classical court gardens? In those presentments
in Tennyson (see the "Idylls of the King"--what sumptuous, perfumed, arras-and-gold Nature,
inimitably described, better than any, fit for princes and knights and peerless ladies--wrathful
or peaceful, just the same--Vivien and Merlin in their strange dalliance, or the death-float
of Elaine, or Geraint and the long journey of his disgraced Enid and himself through the wood,
and the wife all day driving the horses,) as in all the great imported art-works, treatises
systems, from Lucretius down, there is a constantly lurking often pervading something, that
will have to be eliminated, as not only unsuited to modern democracy and science in America,
but insulting to them, and disproved by them.[37]

Still, the rule and demesne of poetry will always be not the exterior, but interior; not the
macrocosm, but microcosm; not Nature, but Man. I haven't said anything about the imperative
need of a race of giant bards in the future, to hold up high to eyes of land and race the eternal
antiseptic models, and to dauntlessly confront greed, injustice, and all forms of that wiliness
and tyranny whose roots never die--(my opinion is, that after all the rest is advanced, that
is what first-class poets are for; as, to their days and occasions, the Hebrew lyrists, Roman
Juvenal, and doubtless the old singers of India, and the British Druids)--to counteract dangers,
immensest ones, already looming in America--measureless corruption in politics--what we call
religion, a mere mask of wax or lace;--for ensemble, that most cankerous, offensive of all
earth's shows--a vast and varied community, prosperous and fat with wealth of money and products
and business ventures--plenty of mere intellectuality too--and then utterly without the sound,
prevailing, moral and esthetic health-action beyond all the money and mere intellect of the world.

Is it a dream of mine that, in times to come, west, south, east, north, will silently, surely
arise a race of such poets, varied, yet one in soul--nor only poets, and of the best, but newer,
larger prophets--larger than Judea's, and more passionate--to meet and penetrate those woes,
as shafts of light the darkness?

As I write, the last fifth of the nineteenth century is enter'd upon, and will soon be waning.
Now, and for a long time to come, what the United States most need, to give purport, definiteness,
reason why, to their unprecedented material wealth, industrial products, education by rote
merely, great populousness and intellectual activity, is the central, spinal reality, (or even
the idea of it,) of such a democratic band of-native-born-and-bred teachers, artists, litterateurs,
tolerant and receptive of importations, but entirely adjusted to the West, to ourselves, to
our own days, combinations, differences, superiorities. Indeed, I am fond of thinking that
the whole series of concrete and political triumphs of the Republic are mainly as bases and
preparations for half a dozen future poets, ideal personalities, referring not to a special
class, but to the entire people, four or five millions of square miles.

Long, long are the processes of the development of a nationality Only to the rapt vision does
the seen become the prophecy of the unseen.[38] Democracy, so far attending only to the real,
is not for the real only, but the grandest ideal--to justify the modern by that, and not only
to equal, but to become by that superior to the past.

On a comprehensive summing up of the processes and present and hitherto condition of the United
States, with reference to their future, and the indispensable precedents to it, my point, below
all surfaces, and subsoiling them, is, that the bases and prerequisites of a leading nationality
are, first, at all hazards, freedom, worldly wealth and products on the largest and most varied
scale, common education and intercommunication, and, in general, the passing through of just
the stages and crudities we have passed or are passing through in the United States.

Then, perhaps, as weightiest factor of the whole business, and of the main outgrowths of the
future, it remains to be definitely avow'd that the native-born middle-class population of
quite all the United States--the average of farmers and mechanics everywhere--the real, though
latent and silent bulk of America, city or country, presents a magnificent mass of material,
never before equal'd on earth. It is this material, quite unexpress'd by literature or art,
that in every respect insures the future of the republic. During the secession war I was with
the armies, and saw the rank and file, north and south, and studied them for four years. I
have never had the least doubt about the country in its essential future since.

Meantime, we can (perhaps) do no better than to saturate ourselves with, and continue to give
imitations, yet awhile, of the esthetic models, supplies, of that past and of those lands we
spring from. Those wondrous stores, reminiscences, floods, currents! Let them flow on, flow
hither freely. And let the sources be enlarged, to include not only the works of British origin,
as now, but stately and devout Spain, courteous France, profound Germany, the manly Scandinavian
lands, Italy's art race, and always the mystic Orient. Remembering that at present, and doubtless
long ahead, a certain humility would well become us. The course through time of highest civilization,
does it not wait the first glimpse of our contribution to its kosmic train of poems, bibles,
first-class structures, perpetuities--Egypt and Palestine and India--Greece and Rome and mediaeval
Europe--and so onward? The shadowy procession is not a meagre one, and the standard not a low
one. All that is mighty in our kind seems to have already trod the road. Ah, never may America
forget her thanks and reverence for samples, treasures such as these--that other life-blood,
inspiration, sunshine, hourly in use to-day, all days, forever, through her broad demesne!

All serves our New World progress, even the bafflers, head-winds, cross-tides. Through many
perturbations and squalls, and much backing and filling, the ship, upon the whole, makes unmistakably
for her destination. Shakspere has served, and serves, may-be, the best of any.

For conclusion, a passing thought, a contrast, of him who, in my opinion, continues and stands
for the Shaksperean cultus at the present day among all English-writing peoples--of Tennyson,
his poetry. I find it impossible, as I taste the sweetness of those lines, to escape the flavor,
the conviction, the lush-ripening culmination, and last honey of decay (I dare not call it
rottenness) of that feudalism which the mighty English dramatist painted in all the splendors
of its noon and afternoon. And how they are chanted--both poets! Happy those kings and nobles
to be so sung, so told! To run their course--to get their deeds and shapes in lasting pigments--the
very pomp and dazzle of the sunset!

Meanwhile, democracy waits the coming of its bards in silence and in twilight--but 'tis the
twilight of the dawn.

Notes:

[35] A few years ago I saw the question, "Has America produced any great poem?" announced as
prize-subject for the competition of some university in Northern Europe. I saw the item in
a foreign paper and made a note of it; but being taken down with paralysis, and prostrated
for a long season, the matter slipp'd away, and I have never been able since to get hold of
any essay presented for the prize, or report of the discussion, nor to learn for certain whether
there was any essay or discussion, nor can I now remember the place. It may have been Upsala,
or possibly Heidelberg. Perhaps some German or Scandinavian can give particulars. I think it
was in 1872.

[36] In a long and prominent editorial, at the time, on the death of William Cullen Bryant.

[37] Whatever may be said of the few principal poems--or their best passages--it is certain
that the overwhelming mass of poetic works, as now absorb'd into human character, exerts a
certain constipating, repressing, indoor, and artificial influence, impossible to elude--seldom
or never that freeing, dilating, joyous one, with which uncramp'd Nature works on every individual
without exception.

[38] Is there not such a thing as the philosophy of American history and politics? And if so,
what is it?... Wise men say there are two sets of wills to nations and to persons--one set
that acts and works from explainable motives--from teaching, intelligence, judgment, circumstance,
caprice, emulation, greed, etc.--and then another set, perhaps deep, hidden, unsuspected, yet
often more potent than the first, refusing to be argued with, rising as it were out of abysses,
resistlessly urging on speakers, doers, communities, unwitting to themselves--the poet to his
fieriest words--the race to pursue its loftiest ideal. Indeed, the paradox of a nation's life
and career, with all its wondrous contradictions, can probably only be explain'd from these
two wills, sometimes conflicting, each operating in its sphere, combining in races or in persons,
and producing strangest results.

Let us hope there is (indeed, can there be any doubt there is?) this great unconscious and
abysmic second will also running through the average nationality and career of America. Let
us hope that, amid all the dangers and defections of the present, and through all the processes
of the conscious will, it alone is the permanent and sovereign force, destined to carry on
the New World to fulfil its destinies in the future--to resolutely pursue those destinies,
age upon age; to build, far, far beyond its past vision, present thought; to form and fashion,
and for the general type, men and women more noble, more athletic than the world has yet seen;
to gradually, firmly blend, from all the States, with all varieties, a friendly, happy, free,
religious nationality--a nationality not only the richest, most inventive, most productive
and materialistic the world has yet known, but compacted indissolubly, and out of whose ample
and solid bulk, and giving purpose and finish to it, conscience, morals, and all the spiritual
attributes, shall surely rise, like spires above some group of edifices, firm-footed on the
earth, yet scaling space and heaven.

Great as they are, and greater far to be, the United States, too, are but a series of steps
in the eternal process of creative thought. And here is, to my mind, their final justification,
and certain perpetuity. There is in that sublime process, in the laws of the universe--and,
above all, in the moral law--something that would make unsatisfactory, and even vain and contemptible,
all the triumphs of war, the gains of peace, and the proudest worldly grandeur of all the nations
that have ever existed, or that (ours included) now exist, except that we constantly see, through
all their worldly career, however struggling and blind and lame, attempts, by all ages, all
peoples, according to their development, to reach, to press, to progress on, and ever farther
on, to more and more advanced ideals.

The glory of the republic of the United States, in my opinion, is to be that, emerging in the
light of the modern and the splendor of science, and solidly based on the past, it is to cheerfully
range itself, and its politics are henceforth to come, under those universal laws, and embody
them, and carry them out, to serve them. And as only that individual becomes truly great who
understands well that, while complete in himself in a certain sense, he is but a part of the
divine, eternal scheme, and whose special life and laws are adjusted to move in harmonious
relations with the general laws of Nature, and especially with the moral law, the deepest and
highest of all, and the last vitality of man or state--so the United States may only become
the greatest and the most continuous, by understanding well their harmonious relations with
entire humanity and history, and all their laws and progress, sublimed with the creative thought
of Deity, through all time, past, present, and future. Thus will they expand to the amplitude
of their destiny, and become illustrations and culminating parts of the kosmos, and of civilization.

No more considering the States as an incident, or series of incidents, however vast, coming
accidentally along the path of time, and shaped by casual emergencies as they happen to arise,
and the mere result of modern improvements, vulgar and lucky, ahead of other nations and times,
I would finally plant, as seeds, these thoughts or speculations in the growth of our republic--that
it is the deliberate culmination and result of all the past--that here, too, as in all departments
of the universe, regular laws (slow and sure in planting, slow and sure in ripening) have controll'd
and govern'd, and will yet control and govern; and that those laws can no more be baffled or
steer'd clear of, or vitiated, by chance, or any fortune or opposition, than the laws of winter
and summer, or darkness and light.

The summing up of the tremendous moral and military perturbations of 1861-'65, and their results--and
indeed of the entire hundred years of the past of our national experiment, from its inchoate
movement down to the present day (1780-1881)--is, that they all now launch the United States
fairly forth, consistently with the entirety of civilization and humanity, and in main sort
the representative of them, leading the van, leading the fleet of the modern and democratic,
on the seas and voyages of the future.

And the real history of the United States--starting from that great convulsive struggle for
unity, the secession war, triumphantly concluded, and the South victorious after all--is only
to be written at the remove of hundreds, perhaps a thousand, years hence.

A MEMORANDUM AT A VENTURE

"All is proper to be express'd, provided our aim is only high enough." --J. F. Millet.

"The candor of science is the glory of the modern. It does not hide and repress; it confronts,
turns on the light. It alone has perfect faith--faith not in a part only, but all. Does it
not undermine the old religious standards? Yes, in God's truth, by excluding the devil from
the theory of the universe--by showing that evil is not a law in itself, but a sickness, a
perversion of the good, and the other side of the good--that in fact all of humanity, and of
everything, is divine in its bases, its eligibilities."

Shall the mention of such topics as I have briefly but plainly and resolutely broach'd in the
"Children of Adam" section of "Leaves of Grass" be admitted in poetry and literature? Ought
not the innovation to be put down by opinion and criticism? and, if those fail, by the District
Attorney? True, I could not construct a poem which declaredly took, as never before, the complete
human identity, physical, moral, emotional, and intellectual, (giving precedence and compass
in a certain sense to the first,) nor fulfil that bona fide candor and entirety of treatment
which was a part of my purpose, without comprehending this section also. But I would entrench
myself more deeply and widely than that. And while I do not ask any man to indorse my theory,
I confess myself anxious that what I sought to write and express, and the ground I built on,
shall be at least partially understood, from its own platform. The best way seems to me to
confront the question with entire frankness.

There are, generally speaking, two points of view, two conditions of the world's attitude toward
these matters; the first, the conventional one of good folks and good print everywhere, repressing
any direct statement of them, and making allusions only at second or third hand--(as the Greeks
did of death, which, in Hellenic social culture, was not mention'd point-blank, but by euphemisms.)
In the civilization of to-day, this condition--without stopping to elaborate the arguments
and facts, which are many and varied and perplexing--has led to states of ignorance, repressal,
and cover'd over disease and depletion, forming certainly a main factor in the world's woe.
A nonscientific, non-esthetic, and eminently non-religious condition, bequeath'd to us from
the past, (its origins diverse, one of them the far-back lessons of benevolent and wise men
to restrain the prevalent coarseness and animality of the tribal ages--with Puritanism, or
perhaps Protestantism itself for another, and still another specified in the latter part of
this memorandum)--to it is probably due most of the ill births, inefficient maturity, snickering
pruriency, and of that human pathologic evil and morbidity which is, in my opinion, the keel
and reason-why of every evil and morbidity. Its scent, as of something sneaking, furtive, mephitic,
seems to lingeringly pervade all modern literature, conversation, and manners.

The second point of view, and by far the largest--as the world in working-day dress vastly
exceeds the world in parlor toilette--is the one of common life, from the oldest times down,
and especially in England, (see the earlier chapters of "Taine's English Literature," and see
Shakspere almost anywhere,) and which our age to-day inherits from riant stock, in the wit,
or what passes for wit, of masculine circles, and in erotic stories and talk, to excite, express,
and dwell on, that merely sensual voluptuousness which, according to Victor Hugo, is the most
universal trait of all ages, all lands. This second condition, however bad, is at any rate
like a disease which comes to the surface, and therefore less dangerous than a conceal'd one.

The time seems to me to have arrived, and America to be the place, for a new departure--a third
point of view. The same freedom and faith and earnestness which, after centuries of denial,
struggle, repression, and martyrdom, the present day brings to the treatment of politics and
religion, must work out a plan and standard on this subject, not so much for what is call'd
society, as for thoughtfulest men and women, and thoughtfulest literature. The same spirit
that marks the physiological author and demonstrator on these topics in his important field,
I have thought necessary to be exemplified, for once, in another certainly not less important
field.

In the present memorandum I only venture to indicate that plan and view--decided upon more
than twenty years ago, for my own literary action, and formulated tangibly in my printed poems--(as
Bacon says an abstract thought or theory is of no moment unless it leads to a deed or work
done, exemplifying it in the concrete)--that the sexual passion in itself, while normal and
unperverted, is inherently legitimate, creditable, not necessarily an improper theme for poet,
as confessedly not for scientist--that, with reference to the whole construction, organism,
and intentions of "Leaves of Grass," anything short of confronting that theme, and making myself
clear upon it as the enclosing basis of everything, (as the sanity of everything was to be
the atmosphere of the poems,) I should beg the question in its most momentous aspect, and the
superstructure that follow'd, pretensive as it might assume to be, would all rest on a poor
foundation, or no foundation at all. In short, as the assumption of the sanity of birth, Nature
and humanity, is the key to any true theory of life and the universe--at any rate, the only
theory out of which I wrote--it is, and must inevitably be, the only key to "Leaves of Grass,"
and every part of it. That, (and not a vain consistency or weak pride, as a late "Springfield
Republican" charges,) is the reason that I have stood out for these particular verses uncompromisingly
for over twenty years, and maintain them to this day. That is what I felt in my inmost brain
and heart, when I only answer'd Emerson's vehement arguments with silence, under the old elms
of Boston Common.

Indeed, might not every physiologist and every good physician pray for the redeeming of this
subject from its hitherto relegation to the tongues and pens of blackguards, and boldly putting
it for once at least, if no more, in the demesne of poetry and sanity--as something not in
itself gross or impure, but entirely consistent with highest manhood and womanhood, and indispensable
to both? Might not only every wife and every mother--not only every babe that comes into the
world, if that were possible--not only all marriage, the foundation and sine qua non of the
civilized state--bless and thank the showing, or taking for granted, that motherhood, fatherhood,
sexuality, and all that belongs to them, can be asserted, where it comes to question, openly,
joyously, proudly, "without shame or the need of shame," from the highest artistic and human
considerations--but, with reverence be it written, on such attempt to justify the base and
start of the whole divine scheme in humanity, might not the Creative Power itself deign a smile
of approval?

To the movement for the eligibility and entrance of women amid new spheres of business, politics,
and the suffrage, the current prurient, conventional treatment of sex is the main formidable
obstacle. The rising tide of "woman's rights," swelling and every year advancing farther and
farther, recoils from it with dismay. There will in my opinion be no general progress in such
eligibility till a sensible, philosophic, democratic method is substituted.

The whole question--which strikes far, very far deeper than most people have supposed, (and
doubtless, too, something is to be said on all sides,) is peculiarly an important one in art--is
first an ethic, and then still more an esthetic one. I condense from a paper read not long
since at Cheltenham, England, before the "Social Science Congress," to the Art Department,
by P. H. Rathbone of Liverpool, on the "Undraped Figure in Art," and the discussion that follow'd:

"When coward Europe suffer'd the unclean Turk to soil the sacred shores of Greece by his polluting
presence, civilization and morality receiv'd a blow from which they have never entirely recover'
d, and the trail of the serpent has been over European art and European society ever since.
The Turk regarded and regards women as animals without soul, toys to be play'd with or broken
at pleasure, and to be hidden, partly from shame, but chiefly for the purpose of stimulating
exhausted passion. Such is the unholy origin of the objection to the nude as a fit subject
for art; it is purely Asiatic, and though not introduced for the first time in the fifteenth
century, is yet to be traced to the source of all impurity--the East. Although the source of
the prejudice is thoroughly unhealthy and impure, yet it is now shared by many pure-minded
and honest, if somewhat uneducated, people. But I am prepared to maintain that it is necessary
for the future of English art and of English morality that the right of the nude to a place
in our galleries should be boldly asserted; it must, however, be the nude as represented by
thoroughly trained artists, and with a pure and noble ethic purpose. The human form, male and
female, is the type and standard of all beauty of form and proportion, and it is necessary
to be thoroughly familiar with it in order safely to judge of all beauty which consists of
form and proportion. To women it is most necessary that they should become thoroughly imbued
with the knowledge of the ideal female form, in order that they should recognize the perfection
of it at once, and without effort, and so far as possible avoid deviations from the ideal.
Had this been the case in times past, we should not have had to deplore the distortions effected
by tight-lacing, which destroy'd the figure and ruin'd the health of so many of the last generation.
Nor should we have had the scandalous dresses alike of society and the stage. The extreme development
of the low dresses which obtain'd some years ago, when the stays crush'd up the breasts into
suggestive prominence, would surely have been check'd, had the eye of the public been properly
educated by familiarity with the exquisite beauty of line of a well-shaped bust. I might show
how thorough acquaintance with the ideal nude foot would probably have much modified the foot-torturing
boots and high heels, which wring the foot out of all beauty of line, and throw the body forward
into an awkward and ungainly attitude.

It is argued that the effect of nude representation of women upon young men is unwholesome,
but it would not be so if such works were admitted without question into our galleries, and
became thoroughly familiar to them. On the contrary, it would do much to clear away from healthy-hearted
lads one of their sorest trials--that prurient curiosity which is bred of prudish concealment.
Where there is mystery there is the suggestion of evil, and to go to a theatre, where you have
only to look at the stalls to see one-half of the female form, and to the stage to see the
other half undraped, is far more pregnant with evil imaginings than the most objectionable
of totally undraped figures. In French art there have been questionable nude figures exhibited;
but the fault was not that they were nude, but that they were the portraits of ugly immodest
women. Some discussion follow'd. There was a general concurrence in the principle contended
for by the reader of the paper. Sir Walter Stirling maintain'd that the perfect male figure,
rather than the female, was the model of beauty. After a few remarks from Rev. Mr. Roberts
and Colonel Oldfield, the Chairman regretted that no opponent of nude figures had taken part
in the discussion. He agreed with Sir Walter Stirling as to the male figure being the most
perfect model of proportion. He join'd in defending the exhibition of nude figures, but thought
considerable supervision should be exercis'd over such exhibitions.

No, it is not the picture or nude statue or text, with clear aim, that is indecent; it is the
beholder's own thought, inference, distorted construction. True modesty is one of the most
precious of attributes, even virtues, but in nothing is there more pretense, more falsity,
than the needless assumption of it. Through precept and consciousness, man has long enough
realized how bad he is. I would not so much disturb or demolish that conviction, only to resume
and keep unerringly with it the spinal meaning of the Scriptural text, God overlook'd all that
He had made, (including the apex of the whole--humanity--with its elements, passions, appetites,)
and behold, it was very good."

Does not anything short of that third point of view, when you come to think of it profoundly
and with amplitude, impugn Creation from the outset? In fact, however overlaid, or unaware
of itself, does not the conviction involv'd in it perennially exist at the centre of all society,
and of the sexes, and of marriage? Is it not really an intuition of the human race? For, old
as the world is, and beyond statement as are the countless and splendid results of its culture
and evolution, perhaps the best and earliest and purest intuitions of the human race have yet
to be develop'd.

DEATH OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN LECTURE

deliver'd in New York, April 14, 1879--in Philadelphia, '80--in Boston, '81

How often since that dark and dripping Saturday--that chilly April day, now fifteen years bygone--my
heart has entertain'd the dream, the wish, to give of Abraham Lincoln's death, its own special
thought and memorial. Yet now the sought-for opportunity offers, I find my notes incompetent,
(why, for truly profound themes, is statement so idle? why does the right phrase never offer?)
and the fit tribute I dream'd of, waits unprepared as ever. My talk here indeed is less because
of itself or anything in it, and nearly altogether because I feel a desire, apart from any
talk, to specify the day, the martyrdom. It is for this, my friends, I have call'd you together.
Oft as the rolling years bring back this hour, let it again, however briefly, be dwelt upon.
For my own part, I hope and desire, till my own dying day, whenever the 14th or 15th of April
comes, to annually gather a few friends, and hold its tragic reminiscence. No narrow or sectional
reminiscence. It belongs to these States in their entirety--not the North only, but the South--perhaps
belongs most tenderly and devoutly to the South, of all; for there, really, this man's birth-stock.
There and thence his antecedent stamp. Why should I not say that thence his manliest traits--his
universality--his canny, easy ways and words upon the surface--his inflexible determination
and courage at heart? Have you never realized it, my friends, that Lincoln, though grafted
on the West, is essentially, in personnel and character, a Southern contribution?

And though by no means proposing to resume the secession war to-night, I would briefly remind
you of the public conditions preceding that contest. For twenty years, and especially during
the four or five before the war actually began, the aspect of affairs in the United States,
though without the flash of military excitement, presents more than the survey of a battle,
or any extended campaign, or series, even of Nature's convulsions. The hot passions of the
South--the strange mixture at the North of inertia, incredulity, and conscious power--the incendiarism
of the abolitionists--the rascality and grip of the politicians, unparallel'd in any land,
any age. To these I must not omit adding the honesty of the essential bulk of the people everywhere--yet
with all the seething fury and contradiction of their natures more arous'd than the Atlantic's
waves in wildest equinox. In politics, what can be more ominous, (though generally unappreciated
then)--what more significant than the Presidentiads of Fillmore and Buchanan? proving conclusively
that the weakness and wickedness of elected rulers are just as likely to afflict us here, as
in the countries of the Old World, under their monarchies, emperors, and aristocracies. In
that Old World were everywhere heard underground rumblings, that died out, only to again surely
return. While in America the volcano, though civic yet, continued to grow more and more convulsive--more
and more stormy and threatening.

In the height of all this excitement and chaos, hovering on the edge at first, and then merged
in its very midst, and destined to play a leading part, appears a strange and awkward figure.
I shall not easily forget the first time I ever saw Abraham Lincoln. It must have been about
the 18th or 19th of February, 1861. It was rather a pleasant afternoon, in New York city, as
he arrived there from the West, to remain a few hours, and then pass on to Washington, to prepare
for his inauguration. I saw him in Broadway, near the site of the present Post-office. He came
down, I think from Canal street, to stop at the Astor House. The broad spaces, sidewalks, and
street in the neighborhood, and for some distance, were crowded with solid masses of people,
many thousands. The omnibuses and other vehicles had all been turn'd off, leaving an unusual
hush in that busy part of the city. Presently two or three shabby hack barouches made their
way with some difficulty through the crowd, and drew up at the Astor House entrance. A tall
figure stepp'd out of the centre of these barouches, paus'd leisurely on the sidewalk, look'd
up at the granite walls and looming architecture of the grand old hotel--then, after a relieving
stretch of arms and legs, turn'd round for over a minute to slowly and good-humoredly scan
the appearance of the vast and silent crowds. There were no speeches--no compliments--no welcome--as
far as I could hear, not a word said. Still much anxiety was conceal'd in that quiet. Cautious
persons had fear'd some mark'd insult or indignity to the President-elect--for he possess'd
no personal popularity at all in New York city, and very little political. But it was evidently
tacitly agreed that if the few political supporters of Mr. Lincoln present would entirely abstain
from any demonstration on their side, the immense majority, who were anything but supporters,
would abstain on their side also. The result was a sulky, unbroken silence, such as certainly
never before characterized so great a New York crowd.

Almost in the same neighborhood I distinctly remember'd seeing Lafayette on his visit to America
in 1825. I had also personally seen and heard, various years afterward, how Andrew Jackson,
Clay, Webster, Hungarian Kossuth, Filibuster Walker, the Prince of Wales on his visit, and
other celebres, native and foreign, had been welcom'd there--all that indescribable human roar
and magnetism, unlike any other sound in the universe--the glad exulting thunder-shouts of
countless unloos'd throats of men! But on this occasion, not a voice--not a sound. From the
top of an omnibus, (driven up one side, close by, and block'd by the curbstone and the crowds,)
I had, I say, a capital view of it all, and especially of Mr. Lincoln, his look and gait--his
perfect composure and coolness--his unusual and uncouth height, his dress of complete black,
stovepipe hat push'd back on the head, dark-brown complexion, seam'd and wrinkled yet canny-looking
face, black, bushy head of hair, disproportionately long neck, and his hands held behind as
he stood observing the people. He look'd with curiosity upon that immense sea of faces, and
the sea of faces return'd the look with similar curiosity. In both there was a dash of comedy,
almost farce, such as Shakspere puts in his blackest tragedies. The crowd that hemm'd around
consisted I should think of thirty to forty thousand men, not a single one his personal friend--while
I have no doubt, (so frenzied were the ferments of the time,) many an assassin's knife and
pistol lurk'd in hip or breast-pocket there, ready, soon as break and riot came.

But no break or riot came. The tall figure gave another relieving stretch or two of arms and
legs; then with moderate pace, and accompanied by a few unknown-looking persons, ascended the
portico-steps of the Astor House, disappear'd through its broad entrance--and the dumb-show ended.

I saw Abraham Lincoln often the four years following that date. He changed rapidly and much
during his Presidency--but this scene, and him in it, are indelibly stamp'd upon my recollection.
As I sat on the top of my omnibus, and had a good view of him, the thought, dim and inchoate
then, has since come out clear enough, that four sorts of genius, four mighty and primal hands,
will be needed to the complete limning of this man's future portrait--the eyes and brains and
finger-touch of Plutarch and Eschylus and Michel Angelo, assisted by Rabelais.

And now--(Mr. Lincoln passing on from this scene to Washington, where he was inaugurated, amid
armed cavalry, and sharpshooters at every point--the first instance of the kind in our history--and
I hope it will be the last)--now the rapid succession of well-known events, (too well known--I
believe, these days, we almost hate to hear them mention'd)--the national flag fired on at
Sumter--the uprising of the North, in paroxysms of astonishment and rage--the chaos of divided
councils--the call for troops--the first Bull Run--the stunning cast-down, shock, and dismay
of the North--and so in full flood the secession war. Four years of lurid, bleeding, murky,
murderous war. Who paint those years, with all their scenes?--the hard-fought engagements--the
defeats, plans, failures--the gloomy hours, days, when our Nationality seem'd hung in pall
of doubt, perhaps death--the Mephistophelean sneers of foreign lands and attaches--the dreaded
Scylla of European interference, and the Charybdis of the tremendously dangerous latent strata
of secession sympathizers throughout the free States, (far more numerous than is supposed)--the
long marches in summer--the hot sweat, and many a sunstroke, as on the rush to Gettysburg in
'63--the night battles in the woods, as under Hooker at Chancellorsville--the camps in winter--the
military prisons--the hospitals--(alas! alas! the hospitals.)

The secession war? Nay, let me call it the Union war. Though whatever call'd, it is even yet
too near us--too vast and too closely overshadowing--its branches unform'd yet, (but certain,)
shooting too far into the future--and the most indicative and mightiest of them yet ungrown.
A great literature will yet arise out of the era of those four years, those scenes--era compressing
centuries of native passion, first-class pictures, tempests of life and death--an inexhaustible
mine for the histories, drama, romance, and even philosophy, of peoples to come--indeed the
verteber of poetry and art, (of personal character too,) for all future America--far more grand,
in my opinion, to the hands capable of it, than Homer's siege of Troy, or the French wars to
Shakspere.

But I must leave these speculations, and come to the theme I have assign'd and limited myself
to. Of the actual murder of President Lincoln, though so much has been written, probably the
facts are yet very indefinite in most persons' minds. I read from my memoranda, written at
the time, and revised frequently and finally since. Out of all the affairs of this world of
woe and failure and disorder, was there really come the confirm'd, unerring sign of plan, like
a shaft of pure light--of rightful rule--of God? The deed hastens. At this period came the
murder of Abraham Lincoln.

Thus the visible incidents and surroundings of Abraham Lincoln's murder, as they really occur'd.
Thus ended the attempted secession of these States; thus the four years' war. But the main
things come subtly and invisibly afterward, perhaps long afterward--neither military, political,
nor (great as those are,) historical. I say, certain secondary and indirect results, out of
the tragedy of this death, are, in my opinion, greatest. Not the event of the murder itself.
Not that Mr. Lincoln strings the principal points and personages of the period, like beads,
upon the single string of his career. Not that his idiosyncrasy, in its sudden appearance and
disappearance, stamps this Republic with a stamp more mark'd and enduring than any yet given
by any one man--(more even than Washington's;)--but, join'd with these, the immeasurable value
and meaning of that whole tragedy lies, to me, in senses finally dearest to a nation, (and
here all our own)--the imaginative and artistic senses--the literary and dramatic ones. Not
in any common or low meaning of those terms, but a meaning precious to the race, and to every
age. A long and varied series of contradictory events arrives at last at its highest poetic,
single, central, pictorial denouement. The whole involved, baffling, multiform whirl of the
secession period comes to a head, and is gather'd in one brief flash of lightning-illumination--one
simple, fierce deed. Its sharp culmination, and as it were solution, of so many bloody and
angry problems, illustrates those climax-moments on the stage of universal Time, where the
historic Muse at one entrance, and the tragic Muse at the other, suddenly ringing down the
curtain, close an immense act in the long drama of creative thought, and give it radiation,
tableau, stranger than fiction. Fit radiation--fit close! How the imagination--how the student
loves these things! America, too, is to have them. For not in all great deaths, nor far or
near--not Caesar in the Roman senate-house, or Napoleon passing away in the wild night-storm
at St. Helena--not Paleologus, falling, desperately fighting, piled over dozens deep with Grecian
corpses--not calm old Socrates, drinking the hemlock--outvies that terminus of the secession
war, in one man's life, here in our midst, in our own time--that seal of the emancipation of
three million slaves--that parturition and delivery of our at last really free Republic, born
again, henceforth to commence its career of genuine homogeneous Union, compact, consistent
with itself.

Nor will ever future American Patriots and Unionists, indifferently over the whole land, or
North or South, find a better moral to their lesson. The final use of the greatest men of a
Nation is, after all, not with reference to their deeds in themselves, or their direct bearing
on their times or lands. The final use of a heroic-eminent life--especially of a heroic-eminent
death--is its indirect filtering into the nation and the race, and to give, often at many removes,
but unerringly, age after age, color and fibre to the personalism of the youth and maturity
of that age, and of mankind. Then there is a cement to the whole people, subtler, more underlying,
than any thing in written constitution, or courts or armies--namely, the cement of a death
identified thoroughly with that people, at its head, and for its sake. Strange, (is it not?)
that battles, martyrs, agonies, blood, even assassination, should so condense--perhaps only
really, lastingly condense--a Nationality.

I repeat it--the grand deaths of the race--the dramatic deaths of every nationality--are its
most important inheritance-value--in some respects beyond its literature and art--(as the hero
is beyond his finest portrait, and the battle itself beyond its choicest song or epic.) Is
not here indeed the point underlying all tragedy? the famous pieces of the Grecian masters--and
all masters? Why, if the old Greeks had had this man, what trilogies of plays--what epics--would
have been made out of him! How the rhapsodes would have recited him! How quickly that quaint
tall form would have enter'd into the region where men vitalize gods, and gods divinify men!
But Lincoln, his times, his death--great as any, any age--belong altogether to our own, and
our autochthonic. (Sometimes indeed I think our American days, our own stage--the actors we
know and have shaken hands, or talk'd with--more fateful than anything in Eschylus--more heroic
than the fighters around Troy--afford kings of men for our Democracy prouder than Agamemnon--models
of character cute and hardy as Ulysses--deaths more pitiful than Priam's.)

When, centuries hence, (as it must, in my opinion, be centuries hence before the life of these
States, or of Democracy, can be really written and illustrated,) the leading historians and
dramatists seek for some personage, some special event, incisive enough to mark with deepest
cut, and mnemonize, this turbulent Nineteenth century of ours, (not only these States, but
all over the political and social world)--something, perhaps, to close that gorgeous procession
of European feudalism, with all its pomp and caste-prejudices, (of whose long train we in America
are yet so inextricably the heirs)--something to identify with terrible identification, by
far the greatest revolutionary step in the history of the United States, (perhaps the greatest
of the world, our century)--the absolute extirpation and erasure of slavery from the States--those
historians will seek in vain for any point to serve more thoroughly their purpose, than Abraham
Lincoln's death.

Dear to the Muse--thrice dear to Nationality--to the whole human race--precious to this Union--precious
to Democracy--unspeakably and forever precious--their first great Martyr Chief.

TWO LETTERS

I

TO -- -- -- LONDON, ENGLAND

Camden, N.J., U.S. America, March 17th, 1876. DEAR FRIEND:--Yours of the 28th Feb. receiv'd,
and indeed welcom'd. I am jogging along still about the same in physical condition--still certainly
no worse, and I sometimes lately suspect rather better, or at any rate more adjusted to the
situation. Even begin to think of making some move, some change of base, &c.: the doctors have
been advising it for over two years, but I haven't felt to do it yet. My paralysis does not
lift--I cannot walk any distance--I still have this baffling, obstinate, apparently chronic
affection of the stomachic apparatus and liver: yet I get out of doors a little every day--write
and read in moderation--appetite sufficiently good--(eat only very plain food, but always did
that)--digestion tolerable--spirits unflagging. I have told you most of this before, but suppose
you might like to know it all again, up to date. Of course, and pretty darkly coloring the
whole, are bad spells, prostrations, some pretty grave ones, intervals--and I have resign'd
myself to the certainty of permanent incapacitation from solid work: but things may continue
at least in this half-and-half way for months, even years.

My books are out, the new edition; a set of which, immediately on receiving your letter of
28th, I have sent you, (by mail, March 15,) and I suppose you have before this receiv'd them.
My dear friend, your offers of help, and those of my other British friends, I think I fully
appreciate, in the right spirit, welcome and acceptive--leaving the matter altogether in your
and their hands, and to your and their convenience, discretion, leisure, and nicety. Though
poor now, even to penury, I have not so far been deprived of any physical thing I need or wish
whatever, and I feel confident I shall not in the future. During my employment of seven years
or more in Washington after the war (1865-'72) I regularly saved part of my wages: and, though
the sum has now become about exhausted by my expenses of the last three years, there are already
beginning at present welcome dribbles hitherward from the sales of my new edition, which I
just job and sell, myself, (all through this illness, my book-agents for three years in New
York successively, badly cheated me,) and shall continue to dispose of the books myself. And
that is the way I should prefer to glean my support. In that way I cheerfully accept all the
aid my friends find it convenient to proffer.

To repeat a little, and without undertaking details, understand, dear friend, for yourself
and all, that I heartily and most affectionately thank my British friends, and that I accept
their sympathetic generosity in the same spirit in which I believe (nay, know) it is offer'd--that
though poor I am not in want--that I maintain good heart and cheer; and that by far the most
satisfaction to me (and I think it can be done, and believe it will be) will be to live, as
long as possible, on the sales, by myself, of my own works, and perhaps, if practicable, by
further writings for the press.

W. W.

I am prohibited from writing too much, and I must make this candid statement of the situation
serve for all my dear friends over there.

II

TO -- -- -- DRESDEN, SAXONY

Camden, New Jersey, U.S.A., Dec. 20, '81. DEAR SIR:--Your letter asking definite endorsement
to your translation of my "Leaves of Grass" into Russian is just received, and I hasten to
answer it. Most warmly and willingly I consent to the translation, and waft a prayerful God
speed to the enterprise.

You Russians and we Americans! Our countries so distant, so unlike at first glance--such a
difference in social and political conditions, and our respective methods of moral and practical
development the last hundred years;--and yet in certain features, and vastest ones, so resembling
each other. The variety of stock-elements and tongues, to be resolutely fused in a common identity
and union at all hazards--the idea, perennial through the ages, that they both have their historic
and divine mission--the fervent element of manly friendship throughout the whole people, surpass'd
by no other races--the grand expanse of territorial limits and boundaries--the unform'd and
nebulous state of many things, not yet permanently settled, but agreed on all hands to be the
preparations of an infinitely greater future--the fact that both Peoples have their independent
and leading positions to hold, keep, and if necessary, fight for, against the rest of the world--the
deathless aspirations at the inmost centre of each great community, so vehement, so mysterious,
so abysmic--are certainly features you Russians and we Americans possess in common. As my dearest
dream is for an internationality of poems and poets binding the lands of the earth closer than
all treaties and diplomacy--as the purpose beneath the rest in my book is such hearty comradeship,
for individuals to begin with, and for all the nations of the earth as a result--how happy
I should be to get the hearing and emotional contact of the great Russian peoples.

To whom, now and here, (addressing you for Russia and Russians and empowering you, should you
see fit, to print the present letter, in your book, as a preface,) I waft affectionate salutation
from these shores, in America's name.

W. W.

NOTES LEFT OVER

NATIONALITY--(AND YET) It is more and more clear to me that the main sustenance for highest
separate personality, these States, is to come from that general sustenance of the aggregate,
(as air, earth, rains, give sustenance to a tree)--and that such personality, by democratic
standards, will only be fully coherent, grand and free, through the cohesion, grandeur and
freedom of the common aggregate, the Union. Thus the existence of the true American continental
solidarity of the future, depending on myriads of superb, large-sized, emotional and physically
perfect individualities, of one sex just as much as the other, the supply of such individualities,
in my opinion, wholly depends on a compacted imperial ensemble. The theory and practice of
both sovereignties, contradictory as they are, are necessary. As the centripetal law were fatal
alone, or the centrifugal law deadly and destructive alone, but together forming the law of
eternal kosmical action, evolution, preservation, and life--so, by itself alone, the fullness
of individuality, even the sanest, would surely destroy itself. This is what makes the importance
to the identities of these States of the thoroughly fused, relentless, dominating Union--a
moral and spiritual idea, subjecting all the parts with remorseless power, more needed by American
democracy than by any of history's hitherto empires or feudalities, and the sine qua non of
carrying out the republican principle to develop itself in the New World through hundreds,
thousands of years to come.

Indeed, what most needs fostering through the hundred years to come, in all parts of the United
States, north, south, Mississippi valley, and Atlantic and Pacific coasts, is this fused and
fervent identity of the individual, whoever he or she may be, and wherever the place, with
the idea and fact of AMERICAN TOTALITY, and with what is meant by the Flag, the stars and stripes.
We need this conviction of nationality as a faith, to be absorb'd in the blood and belief of
the People everywhere, south, north, west, east, to emanate in their life, and in native literature
and art. We want the germinal idea that America, inheritor of the past, is the custodian of
the future of humanity. Judging from history, it is some such moral and spiritual ideas appropriate
to them, (and such ideas only,) that have made the profoundest glory and endurance of nations
in the past. The races of Judea, the classic clusters of Greece and Rome, and the feudal and
ecclesiastical clusters of the Middle Ages, were each and all vitalized by their separate distinctive
ideas, ingrain'd in them, redeeming many sins, and indeed, in a sense, the principal reason-why
for their whole career.

Then, in the thought of nationality especially for the United States, and making them original,
and different from all other countries, another point ever remains to be considered. There
are two distinct principles--aye, paradoxes--at the life-fountain and life-continuation of
the States; one, the sacred principle of the Union, the right of ensemble, at whatever sacrifice--and
yet another, an equally sacred principle, the right of each State, consider'd as a separate
sovereign individual, in its own sphere. Some go zealously for one set of these rights, and
some as zealously for the other set. We must have both; or rather, bred out of them, as out
of mother and father, a third set, the perennial result and combination of both, and neither
jeopardized. I say the loss or abdication of one set, in the future, will be ruin to democracy
just as much as the loss of the other set. The problem is, to harmoniously adjust the two,
and the play of the two. [Observe the lesson of the divinity of Nature, ever checking the excess
of one law, by an opposite, or seemingly opposite law--generally the other side of the same
law.] For the theory of this Republic is, not that the General government is the fountain of
all life and power, dispensing it forth, around, and to the remotest portions of our territory,
but that THE PEOPLE are, represented in both, underlying both the General and State governments,
and consider'd just as well in their individualities and in their separate aggregates, or States,
as consider'd in one vast aggregate, the Union. This was the original dual theory and foundation
of the United States, as distinguish'd from the feudal and ecclesiastical single idea of monarchies
and papacies, and the divine right of kings. (Kings have been of use, hitherto, as representing
the idea of the identity of nations. But, to American democracy, both ideas must be fulfill'd,
and in my opinion the loss of vitality of either one will indeed be the loss of vitality of
the other.)

EMERSON'S BOOKS, (THE SHADOWS OF THEM)

In the regions we call Nature, towering beyond all measurement, with infinite spread, infinite
depth and height--in those regions, including Man, socially and historically, with his moral-emotional
influences--how small a part, (it came in my mind to-day,) has literature really depicted--even
summing up all of it, all ages. Seems at its best some little fleet of boats, hugging the shores
of a boundless sea, and never venturing, exploring the unmapp'd--never, Columbus-like, sailing
out for New Worlds, and to complete the orb's rondure. Emerson writes frequently in the atmosphere
of this thought, and his books report one or two things from that very ocean and air, and more
legibly address'd to our age and American polity than by any man yet. But I will begin by scarifying
him--thus proving that I am not insensible to his deepest lessons. I will consider his books
from a democratic and western point of view. I will specify the shadows on these sunny expanses.
Somebody has said of heroic character that "wherever the tallest peaks are present, must inevitably
be deep chasms and valleys." Mine be the ungracious task (for reasons) of leaving unmention'd
both sunny expanses and sky-reaching heights, to dwell on the bare spots and darknesses. I
have a theory that no artist or work of the very first class may be or can be without them.

First, then, these pages are perhaps too perfect, too concentrated. (How good, for instance,
is good butter, good sugar. But to be eating nothing but sugar and butter all the time! even
if ever so good.) And though the author has much to say of freedom and wildness and simplicity
and spontaneity, no performance was ever more based on artificial scholarships and decorums
at third or fourth removes, (he calls it culture,) and built up from them. It is always a make,
never an unconscious growth. It is the porcelain figure or statuette of lion, or stag, or Indian
hunter--and a very choice statuette too--appropriate for the rosewood or marble bracket of
parlor or library; never the animal itself, or the hunter himself. Indeed, who wants the real
animal or hunter? What would that do amid astral and bric-a-brac and tapestry, and ladies and
gentlemen talking in subdued tones of Browning and Longfellow and art? The least suspicion
of such actual bull, or Indian, or of Nature carrying out itself, would put all those good
people to instant terror and flight.

Emerson, in my opinion, is not most eminent as poet or artist or teacher, though valuable in
all those. He is best as critic, or diagnoser. Not passion or imagination or warp or weakness,
or any pronounced cause or specialty, dominates him. Cold and bloodless intellectuality dominates
him. (I know the fires, emotions, love, egotisms, glow deep, perennial, as in all New Englanders--but
the facade, hides them well--they give no sign.) He does not see or take one side, one presentation
only or mainly, (as all the poets, or most of the fine writers anyhow)--he sees all sides.
His final influence is to make his students cease to worship anything--almost cease to believe
in anything, outside of themselves. These books will fill, and well fill, certain stretches
of life, certain stages of development-- are, (like the tenets or theology the author of them
preach'd when a young man,) unspeakably serviceable and precious as a stage. But in old or
nervous or solemnest or dying hours, when one needs the impalpably soothing and vitalizing
influences of abysmic Nature, or its affinities in literature or human society, and the soul
resents the keenest mere intellection, they will not be sought for.

For a philosopher, Emerson possesses a singularly dandified theory of manners. He seems to
have no notion at all that manners are simply the signs by which the chemist or metallurgist
knows his metals. To the profound scientist, all metals are profound, as they really are. The
little one, like the conventional world, will make much of gold and silver only. Then to the
real artist in humanity, what are called bad manners are often the most picturesque and significant
of all. Suppose these books becoming absorb'd, the permanent chyle of American general and
particular character--what a well-wash'd and grammatical, but bloodless and helpless, race
we should turn out! No, no, dear friend; though the States want scholars, undoubtedly, and
perhaps want ladies and gentlemen who use the bath frequently, and never laugh loud, or talk
wrong, they don't want scholars, or ladies and gentlemen, at the expense of all the rest. They
want good farmers, sailors, mechanics, clerks, citizens--perfect business and social relations--perfect
fathers and mothers. If we could only have these, or their approximations, plenty of them,
fine and large and sane and generous and patriotic, they might make their verbs disagree from
their nominatives, and laugh like volleys of musketeers, if they should please. Of course these
are not all America wants, but they are first of all to be provided on a large scale. And,
with tremendous errors and escapades, this, substantially, is what the States seem to have
an intuition of, and to be mainly aiming at. The plan of a select class, superfined, (demarcated
from the rest,) the plan of Old World lands and literatures, is not so objectionable in itself,
but because it chokes the true plan for us, and indeed is death to it. As to such special class,
the United States can never produce any equal to the splendid show, (far, far beyond comparison
or competition here,) of the principal European nations, both in the past and at the present
day. But an immense and distinctive commonalty over our vast and varied area, west and east,
south and north--in fact, for the first time in history, a great, aggregated, real PEOPLE,
worthy the name, and made of develop'd heroic individuals, both sexes--is America's principal,
perhaps only, reason for being. If ever accomplish'd, it will be at least as much, (I lately
think, doubly as much,) the result of fitting and democratic sociologies, literatures and arts--if
we ever get them--as of our democratic politics.

At times it has been doubtful to me if Emerson really knows or feels what Poetry is at its
highest, as in the Bible, for instance, or Homer or Shakspere. I see he covertly or plainly
likes best superb verbal polish, or something old or odd--Waller's "Go, lovely rose," or Lovelace's
lines "to Lucusta"--the quaint conceits of the old French bards, and the like. Of power he
seems to have a gentleman's admiration--but in his inmost heart the grandest attribute of God
and Poets is always subordinate to the octaves, conceits, polite kinks, and verbs.

The reminiscence that years ago I began like most youngsters to have a touch (though it came
late, and was only on the surface) of Emerson-on-the-brain--that I read his writings reverently,
and address'd him in print as "Master," and for a month or so thought of him as such--I retain
not only with composure, but positive satisfaction. I have noticed that most young people of
eager minds pass through this stage of exercise.

The best part of Emersonianism is, it breeds the giant that destroys itself. Who wants to be
any man's mere follower? lurks behind every page. No teacher ever taught, that has so provided
for his pupil's setting up independently--no truer evolutionist.

VENTURES, ON AN OLD THEME

A DIALOGUE--

One party says--We arrange our lives--even the best and boldest men and women that exist, just
as much as the most limited--with reference to what society conventionally rules and makes
right. We retire to our rooms for freedom; to undress, bathe, unloose everything in freedom.
These, and much else, would not be proper in society.

Other party answers--Such is the rule of society. Not always so, and considerable exceptions
still exist. However, it must be called the general rule, sanction'd by immemorial usage, and
will probably always remain so.

First party--Why not, then, respect it in your poems?

Answer--One reason, and to me a profound one, is that the soul of a man or woman demands, enjoys
compensation in the highest directions for this very restraint of himself or herself, level'd
to the average, or rather mean, low, however eternally practical, requirements of society's
intercourse. To balance this indispensable abnegation, the free minds of poets relieve themselves,
and strengthen and enrich mankind with free flights in all the directions not tolerated by
ordinary society.

First party--But must not outrage or give offence to it.

Answer--No, not in the deepest sense--and do not, and cannot. The vast averages of time and
the race en masse settle these things. Only understand that the conventional standards and
laws proper enough for ordinary society apply neither to the action of the soul, nor its poets.
In fact the latter know no laws but the laws of themselves, planted in them by God, and are
themselves the last standards of the law, and its final exponents--responsible to Him directly,
and not at all to mere etiquette. Often the best service that can be done to the race, is to
lift the veil, at least for a time, from these rules and fossil-etiquettes.

NEW POETRY--California, Canada, Texas.--In my opinion the time has arrived to essentially break
down the barriers of form between prose and poetry. I say the latter is henceforth to win and
maintain its character regardless of rhyme, and the measurement-rules of iambic, spondee, dactyl,
&c., and that even if rhyme and those measurements continue to furnish the medium for inferior
writers and themes, (especially for persiflage and the comic, as there seems henceforward,
to the perfect taste, something inevitably comic in rhyme, merely in itself, and anyhow,) the
truest and greatest Poetry, (while subtly and necessarily always rhythmic, and distinguishable
easily enough,) can never again, in the English language, be express'd in arbitrary and rhyming
metre, any more than the greatest eloquence, or the truest power and passion. While admitting
that the venerable and heavenly forms of chiming versification have in their time play'd great
and fitting parts--that the pensive complaint, the ballads, wars, amours, legends of Europe,
&c., have, many of them, been inimitably render'd in rhyming verse--that there have been very
illustrious poets whose shapes the mantle of such verse has beautifully and appropriately envelopt--and
though the mantle has fallen, with perhaps added beauty, on some of our own age--it is, not-withstanding,
certain to me, that the day of such conventional rhyme is ended. In America, at any rate, and
as a medium of highest esthetic practical or spiritual expression, present or future, it palpably
fails, and must fail, to serve. The Muse of the Prairies, of California, Canada, Texas, and
of the peaks of Colorado, dismissing the literary, as well as social etiquette of over-sea
feudalism and caste, joyfully enlarging, adapting itself to comprehend the size of the whole
people, with the free play, emotions, pride, passions, experiences, that belong to them, body
and soul--to the general globe, and all its relations in astronomy, as the savans portray them
to us--to the modern, the busy Nineteenth century, (as grandly poetic as any, only different,)
with steamships, railroads, factories, electric telegraphs, cylinder presses--to the thought
of the solidarity of nations, the brotherhood and sisterhood of the entire earth--to the dignity
and heroism of the practical labor of farms, factories, foundries, workshops, mines, or on
shipboard, or on lakes and rivers--resumes that other medium of expression, more flexible,
more eligible--soars to the freer, vast, diviner heaven of prose.

Of poems of the third or fourth class, (perhaps even some of the second,) it makes little or
no difference who writes them--they are good enough for what they are; nor is it necessary
that they should be actual emanations from the personality and life of the writers. The very
reverse sometimes gives piquancy. But poems of the first class, (poems of the depth, as distinguished
from those of the surface,) are to be sternly tallied with the poets themselves, and tried
by them and their lives. Who wants a glorification of courage and manly defiance from a coward
or a sneak?--a ballad of benevolence or chastity from some rhyming hunks, or lascivious, glib roue?

In these States, beyond all precedent, poetry will have to do with actual facts, with the concrete
States, and--for we have not much more than begun--with the definitive getting into shape of
the Union. Indeed I sometimes think it alone is to define the Union, (namely, to give it artistic
character, spirituality, dignity.) What American humanity is most in danger of is an overwhelming
prosperity, "business" worldliness, materialism: what is most lacking, east, west, north, south,
is a fervid and glowing Nationality and patriotism, cohering all the parts into one. Who may
fend that danger, and fill that lack in the future, but a class of loftiest poets?

If the United States haven't grown poets, on any scale of grandeur, it is certain they import,
print, and read more poetry than any equal number of people elsewhere--probably more than all
the rest of the world combined.

Poetry (like a grand personality) is a growth of many generations--many rare combinations.

To have great poets, there must be great audiences, too.

BRITISH LITERATURE

To avoid mistake, I would say that I not only commend the study of this literature, but wish
our sources of supply and comparison vastly enlarged. American students may well derive from
all former lands--from forenoon Greece and Rome, down to the perturb'd mediaeval times, the
Crusades, and so to Italy, the German intellect--all the older literatures, and all the newer
ones--from witty and warlike France, and markedly, and in many ways, and at many different
periods, from the enterprise and soul of the great Spanish race--bearing ourselves always courteous,
always deferential, indebted beyond measure to the mother-world, to all its nations dead, as
all its nations living--the offspring, this America of ours, the daughter, not by any means
of the British isles exclusively, but of the continent, and all continents. Indeed, it is time
we should realize and fully fructify those germs we also hold from Italy, France, Spain, especially
in the best imaginative productions of those lands, which are, in many ways, loftier and subtler
than the English, or British, and indispensable to complete our service, proportions, education,
reminiscences, &c.... The British element these States hold, and have always held, enormously
beyond its fit proportions. I have already spoken of Shakspere. He seems to me of astral genius,
first class, entirely fit for feudalism. His contributions, especially to the literature of
the passions, are immense, forever dear to humanity--and his name is always to be reverenced
in America. But there is much in him ever offensive to democracy. He is not only the tally
of feudalism, but I should say Shakspere is incarnated, uncompromising feudalism, in literature.
Then one seems to detect something in him--I hardly know how to describe it--even amid the
dazzle of his genius; and, in inferior manifestations, it is found in nearly all leading British
authors. (Perhaps we will have to import the words Snob, Snobbish, &c., after all.) While of
the great poems of Asian antiquity, the Indian epics, the book of Job, the Ionian Iliad, the
unsurpassedly simple, loving, perfect idyls of the life and death of Christ, in the New Testament,
(indeed Homer and the Biblical utterances intertwine familiarly with us, in the main,) and
along down, of most of the characteristic, imaginative or romantic relics of the continent,
as the Cid, Cervantes' Don Quixote, &c., I should say they substantially adjust themselves
to us, and, far off as they are, accord curiously with our bed and board to-day, in New York,

Washington, Canada, Ohio, Texas, California--and with our notions, both of seriousness and
of fun, and our standards of heroism, manliness, and even the democratic requirements--those
requirements are not only not fulfill'd in the Shaksperean productions, but are insulted on
every page.

I add that--while England is among the greatest of lands in political freedom, or the idea
of it, and in stalwart personal character, &c.--the spirit of English literature is not great,
at least is not greatest--and its products are no models for us. With the exception of Shakspere,
there is no first-class genius in that literature--which, with a truly vast amount of value,
and of artificial beauty, (largely from the classics,) is almost always material, sensual,
not spiritual--almost always congests, makes plethoric, not frees, expands, dilates--is cold,
anti-democratic, loves to be sluggish and stately, and shows much of that characteristic of
vulgar persons, the dread of saying or doing something not at all improper in itself, but unconventional,
and that may be laugh'd at. In its best, the sombre pervades it; it is moody, melancholy, and,
to give it its due, expresses, in characters and plots, those qualities, in an unrival'd manner.
Yet not as the black thunder-storms, and in great normal, crashing passions, of the Greek dramatists--clearing
the air, refreshing afterward, bracing with power; but as in Hamlet, moping, sick, uncertain,
and leaving ever after a secret taste for the blues, the morbid fascination, the luxury of wo....

I strongly recommend all the young men and young women of the United States to whom it may
be eligible, to overhaul the well-freighted fleets, the literatures of Italy, Spain, France,
Germany, so full of those elements of freedom, self-possession, gay-heartedness, subtlety,
dilation, needed in preparations for the future of the States. I only wish we could have really
good translations. I rejoice at the feeling for Oriental researches and poetry, and hope it
will go on.

DARWINISM--(THEN FURTHERMORE)

Running through prehistoric ages--coming down from them into the daybreak of our records, founding
theology, suffusing literature, and so brought onward--(a sort of verteber and marrow to all
the antique races and lands, Egypt, India, Greece, Rome, the Chinese, the Jews, &c., and giving
cast and complexion to their art, poems, and their politics as well as ecclesiasticism, all
of which we more or less inherit,) appear those venerable claims to origin from God himself,
or from gods and goddesses--ancestry from divine beings of vaster beauty, size, and power than
ours. But in current and latest times, the theory of human origin that seems to have most made
its mark, (curiously reversing the antique,) is that we have come on, originated, developt,
from monkeys, baboons--a theory more significant perhaps in its indirections, or what it necessitates,
than it is even in itself. (Of the twain, far apart as they seem, and angrily as their conflicting
advocates to-day oppose each other, are not both theories to be possibly reconcil'd, and even
blended? Can we, indeed, spare either of them? Better still, out of them is not a third theory,
the real one, or suggesting the real one, to arise?)

Of this old theory, evolution, as broach'd anew, trebled, with indeed all-devouring claims,
by Darwin, it has so much in it, and is so needed as a counterpoise to yet widely prevailing
and unspeakably tenacious, enfeebling superstitions--is fused, by the new man, into such grand,
modest, truly scientific accompaniments--that the world of erudition, both moral and physical,
cannot but be eventually better'd and broaden'd in its speculations, from the advent of Darwinism.
Nevertheless, the problem of origins, human and other, is not the least whit nearer its solution.
In due time the Evolution theory will have to abate its vehemence, cannot be allow'd to dominate
every thing else, and will have to take its place as a segment of the circle, the cluster--as
but one of many theories, many thoughts, of profoundest value--and re-adjusting and differentiating
much, yet leaving the divine secrets just as inexplicable and unreachable as before--maybe more so.

Then furthermore--What is finally to be done by priest or poet--and by priest or poet only--amid
all the stupendous and dazzling novelties of our century, with the advent of America, and of
science and democracy--remains just as indispensable, after all the work of the grand astronomers,
chemists, linguists, historians, and explorers of the last hundred years--and the wondrous
German and other metaphysicians of that time--and will continue to remain, needed, America
and here, just the same as in the world of Europe, or Asia, of a hundred, or a thousand, or
several thousand years ago. I think indeed more needed, to furnish statements from the present
points, the added arriere, and the unspeakably immenser vistas of to-day. Only, the priests
and poets of the modern, at least as exalted as any in the past, fully absorbing and appreciating
the results of the past, in the commonalty of all humanity, all time, (the main results already,
for there is perhaps nothing more, or at any rate not much, strictly new, only more important
modern combinations, and new relative adjustments,) must indeed recast the old metal, the already
achiev'd material, into and through new moulds, current forms.

Meantime, the highest and subtlest and broadest truths of modern science wait for their true
assignment and last vivid flashes of light--as Democracy waits for it's--through first-class
metaphysicians and speculative philosophs--laying the basements and foundations for those new,
more expanded, more harmonious, more melodious, freer American poems.

"SOCIETY"

I have myself little or no hope from what is technically called "Society" in our American cities.
New York, of which place I have spoken so sharply, still promises something, in time, out of
its tremendous and varied materials, with a certain superiority of intuitions, and the advantage
of constant agitation, and ever new and rapid dealings of the cards. Of Boston, with its circles
of social mummies, swathed in cerements harder than brass--its bloodless religion, (Unitarianism,)
its complacent vanity of scientism and literature, lots of grammatical correctness, mere knowledge,
(always wearisome, in itself)--its zealous abstractions, ghosts of reforms--I should say, (ever
admitting its business powers, its sharp, almost demoniac, intellect, and no lack, in its own
way, of courage and generosity)--there is, at present, little of cheering, satisfying sign.
In the West, California, &c., "society" is yet unform'd, puerile, seemingly unconscious of
anything above a driving business, or to liberally spend the money made by it, in the usual
rounds and shows.

Then there is, to the humorous observer of American attempts at fashion, according to the models
of foreign courts and saloons, quite a comic side--particularly visible at Washington city--a
sort of high-life-below-stairs business. As if any farce could be funnier, for instance, than
the scenes of the crowds, winter nights, meandering around our Presidents and their wives,
cabinet officers, western or other Senators, Representatives, &c.; born of good laboring mechanic
or farmer stock and antecedents, attempting those full-dress receptions, finesse of parlors,
foreign ceremonies, etiquettes, &c.

Indeed, consider'd with any sense of propriety, or any sense at all, the whole of this illy-play'd
fashionable play and display, with their absorption of the best part of our wealthier citizens'
time, money, energies, &c., is ridiculously out of place in the United States. As if our proper
man and woman, (far, far greater words than "gentleman" and "lady,") could still fail to see,
and presently achieve, not this spectral business, but something truly noble, active, sane,
American--by modes, perfections of character, manners, costumes, social relations, &c., adjusted
to standards, far, far different from those.

Eminent and liberal foreigners, British or continental, must at times have their faith fearfully
tried by what they see of our New World personalities. The shallowest and least American persons
seem surest to push abroad, and call without fail on well-known foreigners, who are doubtless
affected with indescribable qualms by these queer ones. Then, more than half of our authors
and writers evidently think it a great thing to be "aristocratic," and sneer at progress, democracy,
revolution, etc. If some international literary snobs' gallery were establish'd, it is certain
that America could contribute at least her full share of the portraits, and some very distinguish'd
ones. Observe that the most impudent slanders, low insults, &c., on the great revolutionary
authors, leaders, poets, &c., of Europe, have their origin and main circulation in certain
circles here. The treatment of Victor Hugo living, and Byron dead, are samples. Both deserving
so well of America, and both persistently attempted to be soil'd here by unclean birds, male
and female.

Meanwhile I must still offset the like of the foregoing, and all it infers, by the recognition
of the fact, that while the surfaces of current society here show so much that is dismal, noisome,
and vapory, there are, beyond question, inexhaustible supplies, as of true gold ore, in the
mines of America's general humanity. Let us, not ignoring the dross, give fit stress to these
precious immortal values also. Let it be distinctly admitted, that--whatever may be said of
our fashionable society, and of any foul fractions and episodes--only here in America, out
of the long history and manifold presentations of the ages, has at last arisen, and now stands,
what never before took positive form and sway, the People--and that view'd en masse, and while
fully acknowledging deficiencies, dangers, faults, this people, inchoate, latent, not yet come
to majority, nor to its own religious, literary, or esthetic expression, yet affords, to-day,
an exultant justification of all the faith, all the hopes and prayers and prophecies of good
men through the past--the stablest, solidest-based government of the world--the most assured
in a future--the beaming Pharos to whose perennial light all earnest eyes, the world over,
are tending--and that already, in and from it, the democratic principle, having been mortally
tried by severest tests, fatalities of war and peace, now issues from the trial, unharm'd,
trebly-invigorated, perhaps to commence forthwith its finally triumphant march around the globe.

THE TRAMP AND STRIKE QUESTIONS: Part of a Lecture proposed, (never deliver'd)

Two grim and spectral dangers--dangerous to peace, to health, to social security, to progress--long
known in concrete to the governments of the Old World, and there eventuating, more than once
or twice, in dynastic overturns, bloodshed, days, months, of terror--seem of late years to
be nearing the New World, nay, to be gradually establishing themselves among us. What mean
these phantoms here? (I personify them in fictitious shapes, but they are very real.) Is the
fresh and broad demesne of America destined also to give them foothold and lodgment, permanent
domicile?

Beneath the whole political world, what most presses and perplexes to-day, sending vastest
results affecting the future, is not the abstract question of democracy, but of social and
economic organization, the treatment of working-people by employers, and all that goes along
with it--not only the wages-payment part, but a certain spirit and principle, to vivify anew
these relations; all the questions of progress, strength, tariffs, finance, &c., really evolving
themselves more or less directly out of the Poverty Question, ("the Science of Wealth," and
a dozen other names are given it, but I prefer the severe one just used.) I will begin by calling
the reader's attention to a thought upon the matter which may not have struck you before--the
wealth of the civilized world, as contrasted with its poverty--what does it derivatively stand
for, and represent? A rich person ought to have a strong stomach. As in Europe the wealth of
to-day mainly results from, and represents, the rapine, murder, outrages, treachery, hoggishness,
of hundreds of years ago, and onward, later, so in America, after the same token--(not yet
so bad, perhaps, or at any rate not so palpable--we have not existed long enough--but we seem
to be doing our best to make it up.)

Curious as it may seem, it is in what are call'd the poorest, lowest characters you will sometimes,
nay generally, find glints of the most sublime virtues, eligibilities, heroisms. Then it is
doubtful whether the State is to be saved, either in the monotonous long run, or in tremendous
special crises, by its good people only. When the storm is deadliest, and the disease most
imminent, help often comes from strange quarters--(the homoeopathic motto, you remember, cure
the bite with a hair of the same dog.)

The American Revolution of 1776 was simply a great strike, successful for its immediate object--but
whether a real success judged by the scale of the centuries, and the long-striking balance
of Time, yet remains to be settled. The French Revolution was absolutely a strike, and a very
terrible and relentless one, against ages of bad pay, unjust division of wealth-products, and
the hoggish monopoly of a few, rolling in superfluity, against the vast bulk of the work-people,
living in squalor.

If the United States, like the countries of the Old World, are also to grow vast crops of poor,
desperate, dissatisfied, nomadic, miserably-waged populations, such as we see looming upon
us of late years--steadily, even if slowly, eating into them like a cancer of lungs or stomach--then
our republican experiment, notwithstanding all its surface-successes, is at heart an unhealthy
failure.

Feb. '79.--I saw to-day a sight I had never seen before--and it amazed, and made me serious;
three quite good-looking American men, of respectable personal presence, two of them young,
carrying chiffonier-bags on their shoulders, and the usual long iron hooks in their hands,
plodding along, their eyes cast down, spying for scraps, rags, bones, &c.

DEMOCRACY IN THE NEW WORLD

estimated and summ'd-up to-day, having thoroughly justified itself the past hundred years,
(as far as growth, vitality and power are concern'd,) by severest and most varied trials of
peace and war, and having establish'd itself for good, with all its necessities and benefits,
for time to come, is now to be seriously consider'd also in its pronounc'd and already developt
dangers. While the battle was raging, and the result suspended, all defections and criticisms
were to be hush'd, and everything bent with vehemence unmitigated toward the urge of victory.
But that victory settled, new responsibilities advance. I can conceive of no better service
in the United States, henceforth, by democrats of thorough and heart-felt faith, than boldly
exposing the weakness, liabilities and infinite corruptions of democracy. By the unprecedented
opening-up of humanity en-masse in the United States, the last hundred years, under our institutions,
not only the good qualities of the race, but just as much the bad ones, are prominently brought
forward. Man is about the same, in the main, whether with despotism, or whether with freedom.
Such a nation--such a society--what nobler conception of moral existence can we form? Would
not that, indeed, be the kingdom of God come on earth?"

To this faith, founded in the ideal, let us hold--and never abandon or lose it. Then what a
spectacle is practically exhibited by our American democracy to-day!

FOUNDATION STAGES--THEN OTHERS

Though I think I fully comprehend the absence of moral tone in our current politics and business,
and the almost entire futility of absolute and simple honor as a counterpoise against the enormous
greed for worldly wealth, with the trickeries of gaining it, all through society our day, I
still do not share the depression and despair on the subject which I find possessing many good
people. The advent of America, the history of the past century, has been the first general
aperture and opening-up to the average human commonalty, on the broadest scale, of the eligibilities
to wealth and worldly success and eminence, and has been fully taken advantage of; and the
example has spread hence, in ripples, to all nations. To these eligibilities--to this limitless
aperture, the race has tended, en-masse, roaring and rushing and crude, and fiercely, turbidly
hastening--and we have seen the first stages, and are now in the midst of the result of it
all, so far. But there will certainly ensue other stages, and entirely different ones. In nothing
is there more evolution than the American mind. Soon, it will be fully realized that ostensible
wealth and money-making, show, luxury, &c., imperatively necessitate something beyond--namely,
the sane, eternal moral and spiritual-esthetic attributes, elements. (We cannot have even that
realization on any less terms than the price we are now paying for it.) Soon, it will be understood
clearly, that the State cannot flourish, (nay, cannot exist,) without those elements. They
will gradually enter into the chyle of sociology and literature. They will finally make the
blood and brawn of the best American individualities of both sexes--and thus, with them, to
a certainty, (through these very processes of to-day,) dominate the New World.

GENERAL SUFFRAGE, ELECTIONS, ETC.

It still remains doubtful to me whether these will ever secure, officially, the best wit and
capacity--whether, through them, the first-class genius of America will ever personally appear
in the high political stations, the Presidency, Congress, the leading State offices, &c. Those
offices, or the candidacy for them, arranged, won, by caucusing, money, the favoritism or pecuniary
interest of rings, the superior manipulation of the ins over the outs, or the outs over the
ins, are, indeed, at best, the mere business agencies of the people, are useful as formulating,
neither the best and highest, but the average of the public judgment, sense, justice, (or sometimes
want of judgment, sense, justice.) We elect Presidents, Congressmen, &c., not so much to have
them consider and decide for us, but as surest practical means of expressing the will of majorities
on mooted questions, measures, &c.

As to general suffrage, after all, since we have gone so far, the more general it is, the better.
I favor the widest opening of the doors. Let the ventilation and area be wide enough, and all
is safe. We can never have a born penitentiary-bird, or panel-thief, or lowest gambling-hell
or groggery keeper, for President--though such may not only emulate, but get, high offices
from localities--even from the proud and wealthy city of New York.

WHO GETS THE PLUNDER?

The protectionists are fond of flashing to the public eye the glittering delusion of great
money-results from manufactures, mines, artificial exports--so many millions from this source,
and so many from that--such a seductive, unanswerable show--an immense revenue of annual cash
from iron, cotton, woollen, leather goods, and a hundred other things, all bolstered up by
"protection." But the really important point of all is, into whose pockets does this plunder
really go? It would be some excuse and satisfaction if even a fair proportion of it went to
the masses of laboring-men--resulting in homesteads to such, men, women, children--myriads
of actual homes in fee simple, in every State, (not the false glamour of the stunning wealth
reported in the census, in the statistics, or tables in the newspapers,) but a fair division
and generous average to those workmen and workwomen--that would be something. But the fact
itself is nothing of the kind. The profits of "protection" go altogether to a few score select
persons--who, by favors of Congress, State legislatures, the banks, and other special advantages,
are forming a vulgar aristocracy, full as bad as anything in the British or European castes,
of blood, or the dynasties there of the past. As Sismondi pointed out, the true prosperity
of a nation is not in the great wealth of a special class, but is only to be really attain'd
in having the bulk of the people provided with homes or land in fee simple. This may not be
the best show, but it is the best reality.

FRIENDSHIP, (THE REAL ARTICLE)

Though Nature maintains, and must prevail, there will always be plenty of people, and good
people, who cannot, or think they cannot, see anything in that last, wisest, most envelop'd
of proverbs, "Friendship rules the World." Modern society, in its largest vein, is essentially
intellectual, infidelistic--secretly admires, and depends most on, pure compulsion or science,
its rule and sovereignty--is, in short, in "cultivated" quarters, deeply Napoleonic.

"Friendship," said Bonaparte, in one of his lightning-flashes of candid garrulity, "Friendship
is but a name. I love no one--not even my brothers; Joseph perhaps a little. Still, if I do
love him, it is from habit, because he is the eldest of us. Duroc? Ay, him, if any one, I love
in a sort--but why? He suits me; he is cool, undemonstrative, unfeeling--has no weak affections--never
embraces any one--never weeps."

I am not sure but the same analogy is to be applied, in cases, often seen, where, with an extra
development and acuteness of the intellectual faculties, there is a mark'd absence of the spiritual,
affectional, and sometimes, though more rarely, the highest esthetic and moral elements of
cognition.

LACKS AND WANTS YET

Of most foreign countries, small or large, from the remotest times known, down to our own,
each has contributed after its kind, directly or indirectly, at least one great undying song,
to help vitalize and increase the valor, wisdom, and elegance of humanity, from the points
of view attain'd by it up to date. The stupendous epics of India, the holy Bible itself, the
Homeric canticles, the Nibelungen, the Cid Campeador, the Inferno, Shakspere's dramas of the
passions and of the feudal lords, Burns's songs, Goethe's in Germany, Tennyson's poems in England,
Victor Hugo's in France, and many more, are the widely various yet integral signs or land-marks,
(in certain respects the highest set up by the human mind and soul, beyond science, invention,
political amelioration, &c.,) narrating in subtlest, best ways, the long, long routes of history,
and giving identity to the stages arrived at by aggregate humanity, and the conclusions assumed
in its progressive and varied civilizations.... Where is America's art-rendering, in any thing
like the spirit worthy of herself and the modern, to these characteristic immortal monuments?
So far, our Democratic society, (estimating its various strata, in the mass, as one,) possesses
nothing--nor have we contributed any characteristic music, the finest tie of nationality--to
make up for that glowing, blood-throbbing, religious, social, emotional, artistic, indefinable,
indescribably beautiful charm and hold which fused the separate parts of the old feudal societies
together, in their wonderful interpenetration, in Europe and Asia, of love, belief, and loyalty,
running one way like a living weft--and picturesque responsibility, duty, and blessedness,
running like a warp the other way. (In the Southern States, under slavery, much of the same.)...
In coincidence, and as things now exist in the States, what is more terrible, more alarming,
than the total want of any such fusion and mutuality of love, belief, and rapport of interest,
between the comparatively few successful rich, and the great masses of the unsuccessful, the
poor? As a mixed political and social question, is not this full of dark significance? Is it
not worth considering as a problem and puzzle in our democracy--an indispensable want to be
supplied?

RULERS STRICTLY OUT OF THE MASSES

In the talk (which I welcome) about the need of men of training, thoroughly school'd and experienced
men, for statesmen, I would present the following as an offset. It was written by me twenty
years ago--and has been curiously verified since:

I say no body of men are fit to make Presidents, Judges, and Generals, unless they themselves
supply the best specimens of the same; and that supplying one or two such specimens illuminates
the whole body for a thousand years. I expect to see the day when the like of the present personnel
of the governments, Federal, State, municipal, military, and naval, will be look'd upon with
derision, and when qualified mechanics and young men will reach Congress and other official
stations, sent in their working costumes, fresh from their benches and tools, and returning
to them again with dignity. The young fellows must prepare to do credit to this destiny, for
the stuff is in them. Nothing gives place, recollect, and never ought to give place, except
to its clean superiors. There is more rude and undevelopt bravery, friendship, conscientiousness,
clear-sightedness, and practical genius for any scope of action, even the broadest and highest,
now among the American mechanics and young men, than in all the official persons in these States,
legislative, executive, judicial, military, and naval, and more than among all the literary
persons. I would be much pleas'd to see some heroic, shrewd, fully-inform'd, healthy-bodied,
middle-aged, beard-faced American blacksmith or boatman come down from the West across the
Alleghanies, and walk into the Presidency, dress'd in a clean suit of working attire, and with
the tan all over his face, breast, and arms; I would certainly vote for that sort of man, possessing
the due requirements, before any other candidate.

(The facts of rank-and-file workingmen, mechanics, Lincoln, Johnson, Grant, Garfield, brought
forward from the masses and placed in the Presidency, and swaying its mighty powers with firm
hand--really with more sway than any king in history, and with better capacity in using that
sway--can we not see that these facts have bearings far, far beyond their political or party ones?)

MONUMENTS--THE PAST AND PRESENT

If you go to Europe, (to say nothing of Asia, more ancient and massive still,) you cannot stir
without meeting venerable mementos--cathedrals, ruins of temples, castles, monuments of the
great, statues and paintings, (far, far beyond anything America can ever expect to produce,)
haunts of heroes long dead, saints, poets, divinities, with deepest associations of ages. But
here in the New World, while those we can never emulate, we have more than those to build,
and far more greatly to build. (I am not sure but the day for conventional monuments, statues,
memorials, &c., has pass'd away--and that they are henceforth superfluous and vulgar.) An enlarg'd
general superior humanity, (partly indeed resulting from those,) we are to build. European,
Asiatic greatness are in the past. Vaster and subtler, America, combining, justifying the past,
yet works for a grander future, in living democratic forms. (Here too are indicated the paths
for our national bards.) Other times, other lands, have had their missions--Art, War, Ecclesiasticism,
Literature, Discovery, Trade, Architecture, &c., &c.--but that grand future is the enclosing
purport of the United States.

LITTLE OR NOTHING NEW, AFTER ALL

How small were the best thoughts, poems, conclusions, except for a certain invariable resemblance
and uniform standard in the final thoughts, theology, poems, &c., of all nations, all civilizations,
all centuries and times. Those precious legacies--accumulations! They come to us from the far-off--from
all eras, and all lands--from Egypt, and India, and Greece, and Rome--and along through the
middle and later ages, in the grand monarchies of Europe--born under far different institutes
and conditions from ours--but out of the insight and inspiration of the same old humanity--the
same old heart and brain--the same old countenance yearningly, pensively, looking forth. What
we have to do to-day is to receive them cheerfully, and to give them ensemble, and a modern
American and democratic physiognomy.

A LINCOLN REMINISCENCE

As is well known, story-telling was often with President Lincoln a weapon which he employ'd
with great skill. Very often he could not give a point-blank reply or comment--and these indirections,
(sometimes funny, but not always so,) were probably the best responses possible. In the gloomiest
period of the war, he had a call from a large delegation of bank presidents. In the talk after
business was settled, one of the big Dons asked Mr. Lincoln if his confidence in the permanency
of the Union was not beginning to be shaken--whereupon the homely President told a little story:
"When I was a young man in Illinois," said he, "I boarded for a time with a deacon of the Presbyterian
church. One night I was roused from my sleep by a rap at the door, and I heard the deacon's
voice exclaiming, 'Arise, Abraham! the day of judgment has come!' I sprang from my bed and
rushed to the window, and saw the stars falling in great showers; but looking back of them
in the heavens I saw the grand old constellations, with which I was so well acquainted, fixed
and true in their places. Gentlemen, the world did not come to an end then, nor will the Union
now."

FREEDOM

It is not only true that most people entirely misunderstand Freedom, but I sometimes think
I have not yet met one person who rightly understands it. The whole Universe is absolute Law.
Freedom only opens entire activity and license under the law. To the degraded or undevelopt--and
even to too many others--the thought of freedom is a thought of escaping from law--which, of
course, is impossible. More precious than all worldly riches is Freedom--freedom from the painful
constipation and poor narrowness of ecclesiasticism--freedom in manners, habiliments, furniture,
from the silliness and tyranny of local fashions--entire freedom from party rings and mere
conventions in Politics--and better than all, a general freedom of One's-Self from the tyrannic
domination of vices, habits, appetites, under which nearly every man of us, (often the greatest
brawler for freedom,) is enslav'd. Can we attain such enfranchisement--the true Democracy,
and the height of it? While we are from birth to death the subjects of irresistible law, enclosing
every movement and minute, we yet escape, by a paradox, into true free will. Strange as it
may seem, we only attain to freedom by a knowledge of, and implicit obedience to, Law. Great--unspeakably
great--is the Will! the free Soul of man! At its greatest, understanding and obeying the laws,
it can then, and then only, maintain true liberty. For there is to the highest, that law as
absolute as any--more absolute than any--the Law of Liberty. The shallow, as intimated, consider
liberty a release from all law, from every constraint. The wise see in it, on the contrary,
the potent Law of Laws, namely, the fusion and combination of the conscious will, or partial
individual law, with those universal, eternal, unconscious ones, which run through all Time,
pervade history, prove immortality, give moral purpose to the entire objective world, and the
last dignity to human life.

BOOK-CLASSES--AMERICA'S LITERATURE

For certain purposes, literary productions through all the recorded ages may be roughly divided
into two classes. The first consisting of only a score or two, perhaps less, of typical, primal,
representative works, different from any before, and embodying in themselves their own main
laws and reasons for being. Then the second class, books and writings innumerable, incessant--to
be briefly described as radiations or offshoots, or more or less imitations of the first. The
works of the first class, as said, have their own laws, and may indeed be described as making
those laws, and amenable only to them. The sharp warning of Margaret Fuller, unquell'd for
thirty years, yet sounds in the air: "It does not follow that because the United States print
and read more books, magazines, and newspapers than all the rest of the world, that they really
have, therefore, a literature."

OUR REAL CULMINATION

The final culmination of this vast and varied Republic will be the production and perennial
establishment of millions of comfortable city homesteads and moderate-sized farms, healthy
and independent, single separate ownership, fee simple, life in them complete but cheap, within
reach of all. Exceptional wealth, splendor, countless manufactures, excess of exports, immense
capital and capitalists, the five-dollar-a-day hotels well fill'd, artificial improvements,
even books, colleges, and the suffrage--all, in many respects, in themselves, (hard as it is
to say so, and sharp as a surgeon's lance,) form, more or less, a sort of anti-democratic disease
and monstrosity, except as they contribute by curious indirections to that culmination--seem
to me mainly of value, or worth consideration, only with reference to it.

There is a subtle something in the common earth, crops, cattle, air, trees, &c., and in having
to do at first hand with them, that forms the only purifying and perennial element for individuals
and for society. I must confess I want to see the agricultural occupation of America at first
hand permanently broaden'd. Its gains are the only ones on which God seems to smile. What others--what
business, profit, wealth, without a taint? What fortune else--what dollar--does not stand for,
and come from, more or less imposition, lying, unnaturalness?

AN AMERICAN PROBLEM

One of the problems presented in America these times is, how to combine one's duty and policy
as a member of associations, societies, brotherhoods or what not, and one's obligations to
the State and Nation, with essential freedom as an individual personality, without which freedom
a man cannot grow or expand, or be full, modern, heroic, democratic, American. With all the
necessities and benefits of association, (and the world cannot get along without it,) the true
nobility and satisfaction of a man consist in his thinking and acting for himself. The problem,
I say, is to combine the two, so as not to ignore either.

THE LAST COLLECTIVE COMPACTION

I like well our polyglot construction-stamp, and the retention thereof, in the broad, the tolerating,
the many-sided, the collective. All nations here--a home for every race on earth. British,
German, Scandinavian, Spanish, French, Italian--papers published, plays acted, speeches made,
in all languages--on our shores the crowning resultant of those distillations, decantations,
compactions of humanity, that have been going on, on trial, over the earth so long.

APPENDIX

PIECES IN EARLY YOUTH

1834-'42

DOUGH-FACE SONG

--Like dough; soft; yielding to pressure; pale----Webster's Dictionary.

    We are all docile dough-faces,
      They knead us with the fist,
    They, the dashing southern lords,
      We labor as they list;
    For them we speak--or hold our tongues,
      For them we turn and twist.

    We join them in their howl against
      Free soil and "abolition,"
    That firebrand--that assassin knife--
      Which risk our land's condition,
    And leave no peace of life to any
      Dough-faced politician.

    To put down "agitation," now,
      We think the most judicious;
    To damn all "northern fanatics,"
      Those "traitors" black and vicious;
    The "reg'lar party usages"
      For us, and no "new issues."

    Things have come to a pretty pass,
      When a trifle small as this,
    Moving and bartering nigger slaves,
      Can open an abyss,
    With jaws a-gape for "the two great parties;"
      A pretty thought, I wis!

    Principle--freedom!--fiddlesticks!
      We know not where they're found.
    Rights of the masses--progress!--bah!
      Words that tickle and sound;
    But claiming to rule o'er "practical men"
      Is very different ground.

    Beyond all such we know a term
      Charming to ears and eyes,
    With it we'll stab young Freedom,
      And do it in disguise;

    Speak soft, ye wily dough-faces--
      That term is "compromise."

    And what if children, growing up,
      In future seasons read
    The thing we do? and heart and tongue
      Accurse us for the deed?
    The future cannot touch us;
      The present gain we heed.

    Then, all together, dough-faces!
      Let's stop the exciting clatter,
    And pacify slave-breeding wrath
      By yielding all the matter;
    For otherwise, as sure as guns,
      The Union it will shatter.

    Besides, to tell the honest truth
      (For us an innovation,)
    Keeping in with the slave power
      Is our personal salvation;
    We've very little to expect
      From t' other part of the nation.

    Besides it's plain at Washington
      Who likeliest wins the race,
    What earthly chance has "free soil"
      For any good fat place?
    While many a daw has feather'd his nest,
      By his creamy and meek dough-face.

    Take heart, then, sweet companions,
      Be steady, Scripture Dick!
    Webster, Cooper, Walker,
      To your allegiance stick!
    With Brooks, and Briggs and Phoenix,
      Stand up through thin and thick!

    We do not ask a bold brave front;
      We never try that game;
    'Twould bring the storm upon our heads,
      A huge mad storm of shame;
    Evade it, brothers--"compromise"
      Will answer just the same.

PAUMANOK.

DEATH IN THE SCHOOL-ROOM (A Fact)

Ting-a-ling-ling-ling! went the little bell on the teacher's desk of a village-school one morning,
when the studies of the earlier part of the day were about half completed. It was well understood
that this was a command for silence and attention; and when these had been obtained, the master
spoke. He was a low thick-set man, and his name was Lugare.

"Boys," said he, "I have had a complaint enter'd, that last night some of you were stealing
fruit from Mr. Nichols's garden. I rather think I know the thief. Tim Barker, step up here, sir."

The one to whom he spoke came forward. He was a slight, fair-looking boy of about thirteen;
and his face had a laughing, good-humor'd expression, which even the charge now preferr'd against
him, and the stern tone and threatening look of the teacher, had not entirely dissipated. The
countenance of the boy, however, was too unearthly fair for health; it had, notwithstanding
its fleshy, cheerful look, a singular cast as if some inward disease, and that a fearful one,
were seated within. As the stripling stood before that place of judgment--that place so often
made the scene of heartless and coarse brutality, of timid innocence confused, helpless child-hood
outraged, and gentle feelings crush' d--Lugare looked on him with a frown which plainly told
that he felt in no very pleasant mood. (Happily a worthier and more philosophical system is
proving to men that schools can be better govern'd than by lashes and tears and sighs. We are
waxing toward that consummation when one of the old-fashion'd school-masters, with his cowhide,
his heavy birch-rod, and his many ingenious methods of child-torture, will be gazed upon as
a scorn'd memento of an ignorant, cruel, and exploded doctrine. May propitious gales speed
that day!)

"Were you by Mr. Nichols's garden-fence last night?" said Lugare.

"Yes, sir," answer'd the boy, "I was."

"Well, sir, I'm glad to find you so ready with your confession. And so you thought you could
do a little robbing, and enjoy yourself in a manner you ought to be ashamed to own, without
being punish'd, did you?"

"I have not been robbing," replied the boy quickly. His face was suffused, whether with resentment
or fright, it was difficult to tell. "And I didn't do anything last night, that I am ashamed
to own."

"No impudence!" exclaim'd the teacher, passionately, as he grasp'd a long and heavy ratan:
"give me none of your sharp speeches, or I'll thrash you till you beg like a dog."

The youngster's face paled a little; his lip quiver'd, but he did not speak.

"And pray, sir," continued Lugare, as the outward signs of wrath disappear'd from his features;
"what were you about the garden for? Perhaps you only receiv'd the plunder, and had an accomplice
to do the more dangerous part of the job?"

"I went that way because it is on my road home. I was there again afterwards to meet an acquaintance;
and--and--But I did not go into the garden, nor take anything away from it. I would not steal,--hardly
to save myself from starving."

"You had better have stuck to that last evening. You were seen, Tim Barker, to come from under
Mr. Nichols's garden-fence, a little after nine o'clock, with a bag full of something or other
over your shoulders. The bag had every appearance of being filled with fruit, and this morning
the melon-beds are found to have been completely clear'd. Now, sir, what was there in that bag?"

Like fire itself glow'd the face of the detected lad. He spoke not a word. All the school had
their eyes directed at him. The perspiration ran down his white forehead like rain-drops.

"Speak, sir!" exclaimed Lugare, with a loud strike of his ratan on the desk.

The boy look'd as though he would faint. But the unmerciful teacher, confident of having brought
to light a criminal, and exulting in the idea of the severe chastisement he should now be justified
in inflicting, kept working himself up to a still greater and greater degree of passion. In
the meantime, the child seem'd hardly to know what to do with himself. His tongue cleav'd to
the roof of his mouth. Either he was very much frighten'd, or he was actually unwell.

"Speak, I say!" again thunder'd Lugare; and his hand, grasping his ratan, tower'd above his
head in a very significant manner.

"I hardly can, sir," said the poor fellow faintly. His voice was husky and thick. "I will tell
you some--some other time. Please let me go to my seat--I a'n't well."

"Oh yes; that's very likely;" and Mr. Lugare bulged out his nose and cheeks with contempt.
"Do you think to make me believe your lies? I've found you out, sir, plainly enough; and I
am satisfied that you are as precious a little villain as there is in the State. But I will
postpone settling with you for an hour yet. I shall then call you up again; and if you don't
tell the whole truth then, I will give you something that'll make you remember Mr. Nichols's
melons for many a month to come:--go to your seat."

Glad enough of the ungracious permission, and answering not a sound, the child crept tremblingly
to his bench. He felt very strangely, dizzily--more as if he was in a dream than in real life;
and laying his arms on his desk, bow'd down his face between them. The pupils turn'd to their
accustom'd studies, for during the reign of Lugare in the village-school, they had been so
used to scenes of violence and severe chastisement, that such things made but little interruption
in the tenor of their way.

Now, while the intervening hour is passing, we will clear up the mystery of the bag, and of
young Barker being under the garden fence on the preceding night. The boy's mother was a widow,
and they both had to live in the very narrowest limits. His father had died when he was six
years old, and little Tim was left a sickly emaciated infant whom no one expected to live many
months. To the surprise of all, however, the poor child kept alive, and seem'd to recover his
health, as he certainly did his size and good looks. This was owing to the kind offices of
an eminent physician who had a country-seat in the neighborhood, and who had been interested
in the widow's little family. Tim, the physician said, might possibly outgrow his disease;
but everything was uncertain. It was a mysterious and baffling malady; and it would not be
wonderful if he should in some moment of apparent health be suddenly taken away. The poor widow
was at first in a continual state of uneasiness; but several years had now pass'd, and none
of the impending evils had fallen upon the boy's head. His mother seem'd to feel confident
that he would live, and be a help and an honor to her old age; and the two struggled on together,
mutually happy in each other, and enduring much of poverty and discomfort without repining,
each for the other's sake.

Tim's pleasant disposition had made him many friends in the village, and among the rest a young
fanner named Jones, who, with his elder brother, work'd a large farm in the neighborhood on
shares. Jones very frequently made Tim a present of a bag of potatoes or corn, or some garden
vegetables, which he took from his own stock; but as his partner was a parsimonious, high-tempered
man, and had often said that Tim was an idle fellow, and ought not to be help'd because he
did not work, Jones generally made his gifts in such a manner that no one knew anything about
them, except himself and the grateful objects of his kindness. It might be, too, that the widow
was both to have it understood by the neighbors that she received food from anyone; for there
is often an excusable pride in people of her condition which makes them shrink from being consider'd
as objects of "charity" as they would from the severest pains. On the night in question, Tim
had been told that Jones would send them a bag of potatoes, and the place at which they were
to be waiting for him was fixed at Mr. Nichols's garden-fence. It was this bag that Tim had
been seen staggering under, and which caused the unlucky boy to be accused and convicted by
his teacher as a thief. That teacher was one little fitted for his important and responsible
office. Hasty to decide, and inflexibly severe, he was the terror of the little world he ruled
so despotically. Punishment he seemed to delight in. Knowing little of those sweet fountains
which in children's breasts ever open quickly at the call of gentleness and kind words, he
was fear'd by all for his sternness, and loved by none. I would that he were an isolated instance
in his profession.

The hour of grace had drawn to its close, and the time approach'd at which it was usual for
Lugare to give his school a joyfully-receiv'd dismission. Now and then one of the scholars
would direct a furtive glance at Tim, sometimes in pity, sometimes in indifference or inquiry.
They knew that he would have no mercy shown him, and though most of them loved him, whipping
was too common there to exact much sympathy. Every inquiring glance, however, remain'd unsatisfied,
for at the end of the hour, Tim remain'd with his face completely hidden, and his head bow'd
in his arms, precisely as he had lean'd himself when he first went to his seat. Lugare look'd
at the boy occasionally with a scowl which seem'd to bode vengeance for his sullenness. At
length the last class had been heard, and the last lesson recited, and Lugare seated himself
behind his desk on the platform, with his longest and stoutest ratan before him.

"Now, Barker," he said, "we'll settle that little business of yours. Just step up here."

Tim did not move. The school-room was as still as the grave. Not a sound was to be heard, except
occasionally a long-drawn breath.

"Mind me, sir, or it will be the worse for you. Step up here, and take off your jacket!"

The boy did not stir any more than if he had been of wood. Lugare shook with passion. He sat
still a minute, as if considering the best way to wreak his vengeance. That minute, passed
in death-like silence, was a fearful one to some of the children, for their faces whiten'd
with fright. It seem'd, as it slowly dropp'd away, like the minute which precedes the climax
of an exquisitely-performed tragedy, when some mighty master of the histrionic art is treading
the stage, and you and the multitude around you are waiting, with stretch'd nerves and suspended
breath, in expectation of the terrible catastrophe.

"Tim is asleep, sir," at length said one of the boys who sat near him. Lugare, at this intelligence,
allow'd his features to relax from their expression of savage anger into a smile, but that
smile look'd more malignant if possible, than his former scowls. It might be that he felt amused
at the horror depicted on the faces of those about him; or it might be that he was gloating
in pleasure on the way in which he intended to wake the slumberer.

"Asleep! are you, my young gentleman!" said he; "let us see if we can't find something to tickle
your eyes open. There's nothing like making the best of a bad case, boys. Tim, here, is determin'd
not to be worried in his mind about a little flogging, for the thought of it can't even keep
the little scoundrel awake."

Lugare smiled again as he made the last observation. He grasp'd his ratan firmly, and descended
from his seat. With light and stealthy steps he cross'd the room and stood by the unlucky sleeper.
The boy was still as unconscious of his impending punishment as ever. He might be dreaming
some golden dream of youth and pleasure; perhaps he was far away in the world of fancy, seeing
scenes, and feeling delights, which cold reality never can bestow. Lugare lifted his ratan
high over his head, and with the true and expert aim which he had acquired by long practice,
brought it down on Tim's back with a force and whacking sound which seem'd sufficient to wake
a freezing man in his last lethargy. Quick and fast, blow foliow'd blow. Without waiting to
see the effect of the first cut, the brutal wretch plied his instrument of torture first on
one side of the boy's back, and then on the other, and only stopped at the end of two or three
minutes from very weariness. But still Tim show'd no signs of motion; and as Lugare, provoked
at his torpidity, jerk'd away one of the child's arms, on which he had been leaning over the
desk, his head dropp'd down on the board with a dull sound, and his face lay turn'd up and
exposed to view. When Lugare saw it, he stood like one transfix'd by a basilisk. His countenance
turn'd to a leaden whiteness; the ratan dropp'd from his grasp; and his eyes, stretch'd wide
open, glared as at some monstrous spectacle of horror and death. The sweat started in great
globules seemingly from every pore in his face; his skinny lips contracted, and show'd his
teeth; and when he at length stretch'd forth his arm, and with the end of one of his fingers
touch'd the child's cheek, each limb quiver'd like the tongue of a snake; and his strength
seemed as though it would momentarily fail him. The boy was dead. He had probably been so for
some time, for his eyes were turn'd up, and his body was quite cold. Death was in the school-room,
and Lugare had been flogging A CORPSE.

-Democratic Review, August, 1841.

ONE WICKED IMPULSE

That section of Nassau street which runs into the great mart of New York brokers and stock-jobbers,
has for a long time been much occupied by practitioners of the law. Tolerably well-known amid
this class some years since, was Adam Covert, a middle-aged man of rather limited means, who,
to tell the truth, gained more by trickery than he did in the legitimate and honorable exercise
of his profession. He was a tall, bilious-faced widower; the father of two children; and had
lately been seeking to better his fortunes by a rich marriage. But somehow or other his wooing
did not seem to thrive well, and, with perhaps one exception, the lawyer's prospects in the
matrimonial way were hopelessly gloomy.

Among the early clients of Mr. Covert had been a distant relative named Marsh, who, dying somewhat
suddenly, left his son and daughter, and some little property, to the care of Covert, under
a will drawn out by that gentleman himself. At no time caught without his eyes open, the cunning
lawyer, aided by much sad confusion in the emergency which had caused his services to be called
for, and disguising his object under a cloud of technicalities, inserted provisions in the
will, giving himself an almost arbitrary control over the property and over those for whom
it was designed. This control was even made to extend beyond the time when the children would
arrive at mature age. The son, Philip, a spirited and high-temper'd fellow, had some time since
pass'd that age. Esther, the girl, a plain, and somewhat devotional young woman, was in her
nineteenth year.

Having such power over his wards, Covert did not scruple openly to use his advantage, in pressing
his claims as a suitor for Esther's hand. Since the death of Marsh, the property he left, which
had been in real estate, and was to be divided equally between the brother and sister, had
risen to very considerable value; and Esther's share was to a man in Covert's situation a prize
very well worth seeking. All this time, while really owning a respectable income, the young
orphans often felt the want of the smallest sum of money--and Esther, on Philip's account,
was more than once driven to various contrivances--the pawn-shop, sales of her own little luxuries,
and the like, to furnish him with means.

Though she had frequently shown her guardian unequivocal evidence of her aversion, Esther continued
to suffer from his persecutions, until one day he proceeded farther and was more pressing than
usual. She possess'd some of her brother's mettlesome temper, and gave him an abrupt and most
decided refusal. With dignity, she exposed the baseness of his conduct, and forbade him ever
again mentioning marriage to her. He retorted bitterly, vaunted his hold on her and Philip,
and swore an oath that unless she became his wife, they should both thenceforward become penniless.
Losing his habitual self-control in his exasperation, he even added insults such as woman never
receives from any one deserving the name of man, and at his own convenience left the house.
That day, Philip return'd to New York, after an absence of several weeks on the business of
a mercantile house in whose employment he had lately engaged.

Toward the latter part of the same afternoon, Mr. Covert was sitting in his office, in Nassau
street, busily at work, when a knock at the door announc'd a visitor, and directly afterward
young Marsh enter'd the room. His face exhibited a peculiar pallid appearance that did not
strike Covert at all agreeably, and he call'd his clerk from an adjoining room, and gave him
something to do at a desk near by.

"I wish to see you alone, Mr. Covert, if convenient," said the newcomer.

"We can talk quite well enough where we are," answer'd the lawyer; "indeed, I don't know that
I have any leisure to talk at all, for just now I am very much press'd with business."

"But I must speak to you," rejoined Philip sternly, "at least I must say one thing, and that
is, Mr. Covert, that you are a villain!"

"Insolent!" exclaimed the lawyer, rising behind the table, and pointing to the door. "Do you
see that, sir? Let one minute longer find you the other side, or your feet may reach the landing
by quicker method. Begone, sir!"

Such a threat was the more harsh to Philip, for he had rather high-strung feelings of honor.
He grew almost livid with suppress'd agitation.

"I will see you again very soon," said he, in a low but distinct manner, his lips trembling
as he spoke; and left the office.

The incidents of the rest of that pleasant summer day left little impression on the young man's
mind. He roam'd to and fro without any object or destination. Along South street and by Whitehall,
he watch'd with curious eyes the movements of the shipping, and the loading and unloading of
cargoes; and listen'd to the merry heave-yo of the sailors and stevedores. There are some minds
upon which great excitement produces the singular effect of uniting two utterly inconsistent
faculties--a sort of cold apathy, and a sharp sensitiveness to all that is going on at the
same time. Philip's was one of this sort; he noticed the various differences in the apparel
of a gang of wharf-laborers--turn'd over in his brain whether they receiv'd wages enough to
keep them comfortable, and their families also--and if they had families or not, which he tried
to tell by their looks. In such petty reflections the daylight passed away. And all the while
the master wish of Philip's thoughts was a desire to see the lawyer Covert. For what purpose
he himself was by no means clear.

Nightfall came at last. Still, however, the young man did not direct his steps homeward. He
felt more calm, however, and entering an eating house, order'd something for his supper, which,
when it was brought to him, he merely tasted, and stroll'd forth again. There was a kind of
gnawing sensation of thirst within him yet, and as he pass'd a hotel, he bethought him that
one little glass of spirits would perhaps be just the thing. He drank, and hour after hour
wore away unconsciously; he drank not one glass, but three or four, and strong glasses they
were to him, for he was habitually abstemious.

It had been a hot day and evening, and when Philip, at an advanced period of the night, emerged
from the bar-room into the street, he found that a thunderstorm had just commenced. He resolutely
walk'd on, however, although at every step it grew more and more blustering.

The rain now pour'd down a cataract; the shops were all shut; few of the street lamps were
lighted; and there was little except the frequent flashes of lightning to show him his way.
When about half the length of Chatham street, which lay in the direction he had to take, the
momentary fury of the tempest forced him to turn aside into a sort of shelter form'd by the
corners of the deep entrance to a Jew pawnbroker's shop there. He had hardly drawn himself
in as closely as possible, when the lightning revealed to him that the opposite corner of the
nook was tenanted also.

"A sharp rain, this," said the other occupant, who simultaneously beheld Philip.

The voice sounded to the young man's ears a note which almost made him sober again. It was
certainly the voice of Adam Covert. He made some commonplace reply, and waited for another
flash of lightning to show him the stranger's face. It came, and he saw that his companion
was indeed his guardian.

Philip Marsh had drank deeply--(let us plead all that may be possible to you, stern moralist.)
Upon his mind came swarming, and he could not drive them away, thoughts of all those insults
his sister had told him of, and the bitter words Covert had spoken to her; he reflected, too,
on the injuries Esther as well as himself had receiv'd, and were still likely to receive, at
the hands of that bold, bad man; how mean, selfish, and unprincipled was his character--what
base and cruel advantages he had taken of many poor people, entangled in his power, and of
how much wrong and suffering he had been the author, and might be again through future years.
The very turmoil of the elements, the harsh roll of the thunder, the vindictive beating of
the rain, and the fierce glare of the wild fluid that seem'd to riot in the ferocity of the
storm around him, kindled a strange sympathetic fury in the young man's mind. Heaven itself
(so deranged were his imaginations) appear'd to have provided a fitting scene and time for
a deed of retribution, which to his disorder'd passion half wore the semblance of a divine
justice. He remember'd not the ready solution to be found in Covert's pressure of business,
which had no doubt kept him later than usual; but fancied some mysterious intent in the ordaining
that he should be there, and that they two should meet at that untimely hour. All this whirl
of influence came over Philip with startling quickness at that horrid moment. He stepp'd to
the side of his guardian.

"Ho!" said he, "have we met so soon, Mr. Covert? You traitor to my dead father--robber of his
children! I fear to think on what I think now!"

The lawyer's natural effrontery did not desert him.

"Unless you'd like to spend a night in the watch-house, young gentleman," said he, after a
short pause, "move on. Your father was a weak man, I remember; as for his son, his own wicked
heart is his worst foe. I have never done wrong to either--that I can say, and swear it!"

"Insolent liar!" exclaimed Philip, his eye flashing out sparks of fire in the darkness.

Covert made no reply except a cool, contemptuous laugh, which stung the excited young man to
double fury. He sprang upon the lawyer, and clutch'd him by the neckcloth.

"Take it, then!" he cried hoarsely, for his throat was impeded by the fiendish rage which in
that black hour possess'd him. "You are not fit to live!"

He dragg'd his guardian to the earth and fell crushingly upon him, choking the shriek the poor
victim but just began to utter. Then, with monstrous imprecations, he twisted a tight knot
around the gasping creature's neck, drew a clasp knife from his pocket, and touching the spring,
the long sharp blade, too eager for its bloody work, flew open.

During the lull of the storm, the last strength of the prostrate man burst forth into one short
loud cry of agony. At the same instant, the arm of the murderer thrust the blade, once, twice,
thrice, deep in his enemy's bosom! Not a minute had passed since that fatal exasperating laugh--but
the deed was done, and the instinctive thought which came at once to the guilty one, was a
thought of fear and escape.

In the unearthly pause which follow'd, Philip's eyes gave one long searching sweep in every
direction, above and around him. Above! God of the all-seeing eye! What, and who was that figure
there?

"Forbear! In Jehovah's name forbear;" cried a shrill, but clear and melodious voice.

It was as if some accusing spirit had come down to bear witness against the deed of blood.
Leaning far out of an open window, appear' d a white draperied shape, its face possess'd of
a wonderful youthful beauty. Long vivid glows of lightning gave Philip a full opportunity to
see as clearly as though the sun had been shining at noonday. One hand of the figure was raised
upward in a deprecating attitude, and his large bright black eyes bent down upon the scene
below with an expression of horror and shrinking pain. Such heavenly looks, and the peculiar
circumstance of the time, fill'd Philip's heart with awe.

"Oh, if it is not yet too late," spoke the youth again, "spare him. In God's voice, I command,
'Thou shalt do no murder!'"

The words rang like a knell in the ear of the terror-stricken and already remorseful Philip.
Springing from the body, he gave a second glance up and down the walk, which was totally lonesome
and deserted; then crossing into Reade street, he made his fearful way in a half state of stupor,
half-bewilderment, by the nearest avenues to his home.

When the corpse of the murder'd lawyer was found in the morning, and the officers of justice
commenced their inquiry, suspicion immediately fell upon Philip, and he was arrested. The most
rigorous search, however, brought to light nothing at all implicating the young man, except
his visit to Covert's office the evening before, and his angry language there. That was by
no means enough to fix so heavy a charge upon him.

The second day afterward, the whole business came before the ordinary judicial tribunal, in
order that Philip might be either committed for the crime, or discharged. The testimony of
Mr. Covert's clerk stood alone. One of his employers, who, believing in his innocence, had
deserted him not in this crisis, had provided him with the ablest criminal counsel in New York.
The proof was declared entirely insufficient, and Philip was discharged.

The crowded court-room made way for him as he came out; hundreds of curious looks fixed upon
his features, and many a jibe pass'd upon him. But of all that arena of human faces, he saw
only one--a sad, pale, black-eyed one, cowering in the centre of the rest. He had seen that
face twice before--the first time as a warning spectre--the second time in prison, immediately
after his arrest--now for the last time. This young stranger--the son of a scorn'd race--coming
to the court-room to perform an unhappy duty, with the intention of testifying to what he had
seen, melted at the sight of Philip's bloodless cheek, and of his sister's convulsive sobs,
and forbore witnessing against the murderer. Shall we applaud or condemn him? Let every reader
answer the question for himself.

That afternoon Philip left New York. His friendly employer own'd a small farm some miles up
the Hudson, and until the excitement of the affair was over, he advised the young man to go
thither. Philip thankfully accepted the proposal, made a few preparations, took a hurried leave
of Esther, and by nightfall was settled in his new abode.

And how, think you, rested Philip Marsh that night? Rested indeed! O, if those who clamor so
much for the halter and the scaffold to punish crime, could have seen that sight, they might
have learn'd a lesson then! Four days had elapsed since he that lay tossing upon the bed there
had slumber'd. Not the slightest intermission had come to his awaken'd and tensely strung sense,
during those frightful days. Disturb'd waking dreams came to him, as he thought what he might
do to gain his lost peace. Far, far away would he go! The cold roll of the murder'd man's eye,
as it turn'd up its last glance into his face--the shrill exclamation of pain--all the unearthly
vividness of the posture, motions, and looks of the dead--the warning voice from above--pursued
him like tormenting furies, and were never absent from his mind, asleep or awake, that long
weary night. Anything, any place, to escape such horrid companionship! He would travel inland--hire
himself to do hard drudgery upon some farm--work incessantly through the wide summer days,
and thus force nature to bestow oblivion upon his senses, at least a little while now and then.
He would fly on, on, on, until amid different scenes and a new life, the old memories were
rubb'd entirely out. He would fight bravely in himself for peace of mind. For peace he would
labor and struggle--for peace he would pray!

At length after a feverish slumber of some thirty or forty minutes, the unhappy youth, waking
with a nervous start, rais'd himself in bed, and saw the blessed daylight beginning to dawn.
He felt the sweat trickling down his naked breast; the sheet where he had lain was quite wet
with it. Dragging himself wearily, he open'd the window. Ah! that good morning air--how it
refresh'd him--how he lean'd out, and drank in the fragrance of the blossoms below, and almost
for the first time in his life felt how beautifully indeed God had made the earth, and that
there was wonderful sweetness in mere existence. And amidst the thousand mute mouths and eloquent
eyes, which appear'd as it were to look up and speak in every direction, he fancied so many
invitations to come among them.

Not without effort, for he was very weak, he dress'd himself, and issued forth into the open air.

Clouds of pale gold and transparent crimson draperied the eastern sky, but the sun, whose face
gladden'd them into all that glory, was not yet above the horizon. It was a time and place
of such rare, such Eden-like beauty! Philip paused at the summit of an upward slope, and gazed
around him. Some few miles off he could see a gleam of the Hudson river, and above it a spur
of those rugged cliffs scatter'd along its western shores. Nearer by were cultivated fields.
The clover grew richly there, the young grain bent to the early breeze, and the air was filled
with an intoxicating perfume. At his side was the large well-kept garden of his host, in which
were many pretty flowers, grass plots, and a wide avenue of noble trees. As Philip gazed, the
holy calming power of Nature--the invisible spirit of so much beauty and so much innocence,
melted into his soul. The disturb'd passions and the feverish conflict subsided. He even felt
something like envied peace of mind--a sort of joy even in the presence of all the unmarr'd
goodness. It was as fair to him, guilty though he had been, as to the purest of the pure. No
accusing frowns show'd in the face of the flowers, or in the green shrubs, or the branches
of the trees. They, more forgiving than mankind, and distinguishing not between the children
of darkness and the children of light--they at least treated him with gentleness. Was he, then,
a being so accurs'd? Involuntarily, he bent over a branch of red roses, and took them softly
between his hands--those murderous, bloody hands! But the red roses neither wither'd nor smell'd
less fragiant. And as the young man kiss'd them, and dropp'd a tear upon them, it seem'd to
him that he had found pity and sympathy from Heaven itself.

Though against all the rules of story-writing, we continue our narrative of these mainly true
incidents (for such they are,) no further. Only to say that the murderer soon departed for
a new field of action--that he is still living--and that this is but one of thousands of cases
of unravel'd, unpunish'd crime--left, not to the tribunals of man, but to a wider power and
judgment.

THE LAST LOYALIST

"She came to me last night, The floor gave back no tread."] The story I am going to tell is
a traditional reminiscence of a country place, in my rambles about which I have often passed
the house, now unoccupied, and mostly in ruins, that was the scene of the transaction. I cannot,
of course, convey to others that particular kind of influence which is derived from my being
so familiar with the locality, and with the very people whose grandfathers or fathers were
contemporaries of the actors in the drama I shall transcribe. I must hardly expect, therefore,
that to those who hear it thro' the medium of my pen, the narration will possess as life-like
and interesting a character as it does to myself.

On a large and fertile neck of land that juts out in the Sound, stretching to the east of New
York city, there stood, in the latter part of the last century, an old-fashion'd country-residence.
It had been built by one of the first settlers of this section of the New World; and its occupant
was originally owner of the extensive tract lying adjacent to his house, and pushing into the
bosom of the salt waters. It was during the troubled times which mark'd our American Revolution
that the incidents occurr'd which are the foundation of my story. Some time before the commencement
of the war, the owner, whom I shall call Vanhome, was taken sick and died. For some time before
his death he had lived a widower; and his only child, a lad of ten years old, was thus left
an orphan. By his father's will this child was placed implicitly under the guardianship of
an uncle, a middle-aged man, who had been of late a resident in the family. His care and interest,
however, were needed but a little while--not two years claps'd after the parents were laid
away to their last repose before another grave had to be prepared for the son--the child who
had been so haplessly deprived of their fostering care.

The period now arrived when the great national convulsion burst forth. Sounds of strife and
the clash of arms, and the angry voices of disputants, were borne along by the air, and week
after week grew to still louder clamor. Families were divided; adherents to the crown, and
ardent upholders of the rebellion, were often found in the bosom of the same domestic circle.
Vanhome, the uncle spoken of as guardian to the young heir, was a man who lean'd to the stern,
the high-handed and the severe. He soon became known among the most energetic of the loyalists.
So decided were his sentiments that, leaving the estate which he had inherited from his brother
and nephew, he join'd the forces of the British king. Thenceforward, whenever his old neighbors
heard of him, it was as being engaged in the cruelest outrages, the boldest inroads, or the
most determin'd attacks upon the army of his countrymen or their peaceful settlements. Eight
years brought the rebel States and their leaders to that glorious epoch when the last remnant
of a monarch's rule was to leave their shores--when the last waving of the royal standard was
to flutter as it should be haul'd down from the staff, and its place fill'd by the proud testimonial
of our warriors' success.

Pleasantly over the autumn fields shone the November sun, when a horseman, of somewhat military
look, plodded slowly along the road that led to the old Vanhome farmhouse. There was nothing
peculiar in his attire, unless it might be a red scarf which he wore tied round his waist.
He was a dark-featured, sullen-eyed man; and as his glance was thrown restlessly to the right
and left, his whole manner appear'd to be that of a person moving amid familiar and accustom'd
scenes. Occasionally he stopp'd, and looking long and steadily at some object that attracted
his attention, mutter'd to himself, like one in whose breast busy thoughts were moving. His
course was evidently to the homestead itself, at which in due time he arrived. He dismounted,
led his horse to the stables, and then, without knocking, though there were evident signs of
occupancy around the building, the traveler made his entrance as composedly and boldly as though
he were master of the whole establishment.

Now the house being in a measure deserted for many years, and the successful termination of
the strife rendering it probable that the Vanhome estate would be confiscated to the new government,
an aged, poverty-stricken couple had been encouraged by the neighbors to take possession as
tenants of the place. Their name was Gills; and these people the traveler found upon his entrance
were likely to be his host and hostess. Holding their right as they did by so slight a tenure,
they ventur'd to offer no opposition when the stranger signified his intention of passing several
hours there.

The day wore on, and the sun went down in the west; still the interloper, gloomy and taciturn,
made no signs of departing. But as the evening advanced (whether the darkness was congenial
to his sombre thoughts, or whether it merely chanced so) he seem'd to grow more affable and
communicative, and informed Gills that he should pass the night there, tendering him at the
same time ample remuneration, which the latter accepted with many thanks.

"Tell me," said he to his aged host, when they were all sitting around the ample hearth, at
the conclusion of their evening meal, "tell me something to while away the hours."

"Ah! sir," answered Gills, "this is no place for new or interesting events. We live here from
year to year, and at the end of one we find ourselves at about the same place which we filled
in the beginning."

"Can you relate nothing, then?" rejoin'd the guest, and a singular smile pass'd over his features;
"can you say nothing about your own place?--this house or its former inhabitants, or former
history?"

The old man glanced across to his wife, and a look expressive of sympathetic feeling started
in the face of each.

"It is an unfortunate story, sir," said Gills, "and may cast a chill upon you, instead of the
pleasant feeling which it would be best to foster when in strange walls."

"Strange walls!" echoed he of the red scarf, and for the first time since his arrival he half
laughed, but it was not the laugh which comes from a man's heart.

"You must know, sir," continued Gills, "I am myself a sort of intruder here. The Vanhomes--that
was the name of the former residents and owners--I have never seen; for when I came to these
parts the last occupant had left to join the red-coat soldiery. I am told that he is to sail
with them for foreign lands, now that the war is ended, and his property almost certain to
pass into other hands."

As the old man went on, the stranger cast down his eyes, and listen'd with an appearance of
great interest, though a transient smile or a brightening of the eye would occasionally disturb
the serenity of his deportment.

"The old owners of this place," continued the white-haired narrator, "were well off in the
world, and bore a good name among their neighbors. The brother of Sergeant Vanhome, now the
only one of the name, died ten or twelve years since, leaving a son--a child so small that
the father's willmade provision for his being brought up by his uncle, whom I mention'd but
now as of the British army. He was a strange man, this uncle; disliked by all who knew him;
passionate, vindictive, and, it was said, very avaricious, even from his childhood.

"Well, not long after the death of the parents, dark stories began to be circulated about cruelty
and punishment and whippings and starvation inflicted by the new master upon his nephew. People
who had business at the homestead would frequently, when they came away, relate the most fearful
things of its manager, and how he misused his brother's child. It was half hinted that he strove
to get the youngster out of the way in order that the whole estate might fall into his own
hands. As I told you before, however, nobody liked the man; and perhaps they judged him too
uncharitably.

"After things had gone on in this way for some time, a countryman, a laborer, who was hired
to do farm-work upon the place, one evening observed that the little orphan Vanhome was more
faint and pale even than usual, for he was always delicate, and that is one reason why I think
it possible that his death, of which I am now going to tell you, was but the result of his
own weak constitution, and nothing else. The laborer slept that night at the farmhouse. Just
before the time at which they usually retired to bed, this person, feeling sleepy with his
day's toil, left the kitchen hearth and wended his way to rest. In going to his place of repose
he had to pass a chamber--the very chamber where you, sir, are to sleep to-night--and there
he heard the voice of the orphan child uttering half-suppress'd exclamations as if in pitiful
entreaty. Upon stopping, he heard also the tones of the elder Vanhome, but they were harsh
and bitter. The sound of blows followed. As each one fell it was accompanied by a groan or
shriek, and so they continued for some time. Shock'd and indignant, the countryman would have
burst open the door and interfered to prevent this brutal proceeding, but he bethought him
that he might get himself into trouble, and perhaps find that he could do no good after all,
and so he passed on to his room.

"Well, sir, the following day the child did not come out among the work-people as usual. He
was taken very ill. No physician was sent for until the next afternoon; and though one arrived
in the course of the night, it was too late--the poor boy died before morning.

"People talk'd threateningly upon the subject, but nothing could be proved against Vanhome.
At one period there were efforts made to have the whole affair investigated. Perhaps that would
have taken place, had not every one's attention been swallow'd up by the rumors of difficulty
and war, which were then beginning to disturb the country.

"Vanhome joined the army of the king. His enemies said that he feared to be on the side of
the rebels, because if they were routed his property would be taken from him. But events have
shown that, if this was indeed what he dreaded, it has happen'd to him from the very means
which he took to prevent it."

The old man paused. He had quite wearied himself with so long talking. For some minutes there
was unbroken silence. Presently the stranger signified his intention of retiring for the night.
He rose, and his host took a light for the purpose of ushering him to his apartment.

When Gills return'd to his accustom'd situation in the large arm-chair by the chimney-hearth,
his ancient helpmate had retired to rest. With the simplicity of their times, the bed stood
in the same room where the three had been seated during the last few hours; and now the remaining
two talk'd together about the singular events of the evening. As the time wore on, Gills show'd
no disposition to leave his cosy chair; but sat toasting his feet, and bending over the coals.
Gradually the insidious heat and the lateness of the hour began to exercise their influence
over the old man. The drowsy indolent feeling which every one has experienced in getting thoroughly
heated through by close contact with a glowing fire, spread in each vein and sinew, and relax'd
its tone. He lean'd back in his chair and slept.

For a long time his repose went on quietly and soundly. He could not tell how many hours elapsed;
but, a while after midnight, the torpid senses of the slumberer were awaken'd by a startling
shock. It was a cry as of a strong man in his agony--a shrill, not very loud cry, but fearful,
and creeping into the blood like cold, polish'd steel. The old man raised himself in his seat
and listen'd, at once fully awake. For a minute, all was the solemn stillness of midnight.
Then rose that horrid tone again, wailing and wild, and making the hearer's hair to stand on
end. One moment more, and the trampling of hasty feet sounded in the passage outside. The door
was thrown open, and the form of the stranger, more like a corpse than living man, rushed into
the room.

"All white!" yell'd the conscience-stricken creature--"all white, and with the grave-clothes
around him. One shoulder was bare, and I saw," he whisper'd, "I saw blue streaks upon it. It
was horrible, and I cried aloud. He stepp'd toward me! He came to my very bedside; his small
hand almost touch'd my face. I could not bear it, and fled."

The miserable man bent his head down upon his bosom; convulsive rattlings shook his throat;
and his whole frame waver'd to and fro like a tree in a storm. Bewilder'd and shock'd, Gills
look'd at his apparently deranged guest, and knew not what answer to make, or what course of
conduct to pursue.

