In the morning went to my office where afterwards the old man brought me my letters from the
carrier.  At noon I went home and dined with my wife on pease porridge and nothing else.  After
that I went to the Hall and there met with Mr. Swan and went with him to Mr. Downing's Counsellor,
who did put me in very little hopes about the business between Mr. Downing and Squib, and told
me that Squib would carry it against him, at which I was much troubled, and with him went to
Lincoln's Inn and there spoke with his attorney, who told me the day that was appointed for
the trial.  From thence I went to Sir Harry Wright's and got him to give me his hand for the
L60 which I am to-morrow to receive from Mr. Calthrop and from thence to Mrs. Jem and spoke
with Madam Scott and her husband who did promise to have the thing for her neck done this week.
Here I took some bedding to send to Mrs. Ann for her to lie in now she hath her fits of the
ague.  Thence I went to Will's and staid like a fool there and played at cards till 9 o'clock
and so came home, where I found Mr. Hunt and his wife who staid and sat with me till 10 and
so good night.

2d.  Home and to bed. Thence with my cozen Roger Pepys,

     [Roger Pepys, son of Talbot Pepys of Impington, a barrister of the
     Middle Temple, M.P.  for Cambridge, 1661-78, and Recorder of that
     town, 1660-88.  He married, for the third time, Parnell, daughter
     and heiress of John Duke, of Workingham, co.  Suffolk, and this was
     the wedding for which the posy ring was required.]

it being term time, we took him out of the Hall to Priors, the Rhenish wine-house, and there
had a pint or two of wine and a dish of anchovies, and bespoke three or four dozen bottles
of wine for him against his wedding.  After this done he went away, and left me order to call
and pay for all that Mrs. Turner would have.  So we called for nothing more there, but went
and bespoke a shoulder of mutton at Wilkinson's to be roasted as well as it could be done,
and sent a bottle of wine home to my house.  Thence to my house where we dined, but with a
great deal of patience, for the mutton came in raw, and so we were fain to stay the stewing
of it.  In the meantime we sat studying a Posy

     [It is supposed that the fashion of having mottoes inscribed on
     rings was of Roman origin.  In the fourteenth and fifteenth
     centuries the posy was inscribed on the outside of the ring, and in
     the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries it was placed inside.  A
     small volume was published in 1674, entitled "Love's Garland: or
     Posies for Rings, Handkerchers and Gloves, and such pretty tokens
     that Lovers send their Loves."]

for a ring for her which she is to have at Roger Pepys his wedding. I returned, and it growing
dark I and they went to take a turn in the park, where Theoph. (who was sent for to us to dinner)
outran my wife and another poor woman, that laid a pot of ale with me that she would outrun
her.  After that I set them as far as Charing Cross, and there left them and my wife, and I
went to see Mrs. Ann, who began very high about a flock bed I sent her, but I took her down.
Here I played at cards till 9 o'clock.  So home and to bed.

4th.  In the morning at my lute an hour, and so to my office, where I staid expecting to have
Mr. Squib come to me, but he did not.  At noon walking in the Hall I found Mr. Swan and got
him and Captain Stone together, and there advised about Mr. Downing's business.  So to Will's,
and sat there till three o'clock and then to Mr. Swan's, where I found his wife in very genteel
mourning for her father, and took him out by water to the Counsellor at the Temple, Mr. Stephens,
and from thence to Gray's Inn, thinking to speak with Sotherton Ellis, but found him not, so
we met with an acquaintance of his in the walks, and went and drank, where I ate some bread
and butter, having ate nothing all day, while they were by chance discoursing of Marriot, the
great eater, so that I was, I remember, ashamed to eat what I would have done.  Here Swan shewed
us a ballad to the tune of Mardike which was most incomparably wrote in a printed hand, which
I borrowed of him, but the song proved but silly, and so I did not write it out.  Thence we
went and leaving Swan at his master's, my Lord Widdrington, I met with Spicer, Washington,
and D. Vines in Lincoln's Inn Court, and they were buying of a hanging jack to roast birds
on of a fellow that was there selling of some.  I was fain to slip from there and went to Mrs.
Crew's to her and advised about a maid to come and be with Mrs. Jem while her maid is sick,
but she could spare none.  Thence to Sir Harry Wright's, but my lady not being within I spoke
to Mrs. Carter about it, who will get one against Monday.  So with a link boy

     [Links were torches of tow or pitch to light the way.  Ed.]

to Scott's, where Mrs. Ann was in a heat, but I spoke not to her, but told Mrs. Jem what I
had done, and after that went home and wrote letters into the country by the post, and then
played awhile on my lute, and so done, to supper and then to bed.  This day my wife killed
her turkeys that Mr. Sheply gave her, that came out of Zealand with my Lord, and could not
get her m'd Jane by no means at any time to kill anything.

5th,(Lord's day).  In the morning before church time Mr. Hawly, who had for this day or two
looked something sadly, which methinks did speak something in his breast concerning me, came
to me telling me that he was out L24 which he could not tell what was become of, and that he
do remember that he had such a sum in a bag the other day, and could not tell what he did with
it, at which I was very sorry but could not help him.  In the morning to Mr. Gunning, where
a stranger, an old man, preached a good honest sermon upon "What manner of love is this that
we should be called the sons of God."  After sermon I could not find my wife, who promised
to be at the gate against my coming out, and waited there a great while; then went to my house
and finding her gone I returned and called at the Chequers, thinking to dine at the ordinary
with Mr. Chetwind and Mr. Thomas, but they not being there I went to my father and found her
there, and there I dined.  To their church in the afternoon, and in Mrs. Turner's pew my wife
took up a good black hood and kept it.  A stranger preached a poor sermon, and so read over
the whole book of the story of Tobit.  After sermon home with Mrs. Turner, staid with her a
little while, then she went into the court to a christening and we to my father's, where I
wrote some notes for my brother John to give to the Mercers' to-morrow, it being the day of
their apposition. After supper home, and before going to bed I staid writing of this day its
passages, while a drum came by, beating of a strange manner of beat, now and then a single
stroke, which my wife and I wondered at, what the meaning of it should be.  This afternoon
at church I saw Dick Cumberland newly come out of the country from his living, but did not
speak to him.

6th.  Before I went to my office I went to Mr. Crew's and paid Mr. Andrews the same L60 that
he had received of Mr. Calthrop the last week.  At the Hall we parted, and meeting Swan, he
and I to the Swan and drank our morning draft.  So back again to the Hall, where I stood upon
the steps and saw Monk go by, he making observance to the judges as he went along.  At noon
my father dined with me upon my turkey that was brought from Denmark, and after dinner he and
I to the Bull Head Tavern, where we drank half a pint of wine and so parted.  I to Mrs. Ann,
and Mrs. Jem being gone out of the chamber she and I had a very high bout, I rattled her up,
she being in her bed, but she becoming more cool, we parted pretty good friends.  Thence I
went to Will's, where I staid at cards till 10 o'clock, losing half a crown, and so home to bed.

7th.  In the morning I went early to give Mr. Hawly notice of my being forced to go into London,
but he having also business we left our office business to Mr. Spicer and he and I walked as
far as the Temple, where I halted a little and then went to Paul's School, but it being too
soon, went and drank my morning draft with my cozen Tom Pepys the turner, and saw his house
and shop, thence to school, where he that made the speech for the seventh form in praise of
the founder, did show a book which Mr. Crumlum had lately got, which is believed to be of the
Founder's own writing.

     ["Fox, or some other 'weighty' friend, on hearing of this,
     complained to Monk, who issued the following order, dated March 9th:
     'I do require all officers and soldiers to forbear to disturb
     peaceable meetings of the Quakers, they doing nothing prejudicial to
     the Parliament or the Commonwealth of England.  George Monk.'  This
     order, we are told, had an excellent effect on the soldiers."--A. C.
     Bickley's 'George Fox and the Early Quakers, London, 1884, p. 179.
     The Quakers were at this time just coming into notice.  The first
     preaching of George Fox, the founder, was in 1648, and in 1655 the
     preachers of the sect numbered seventy-three.  Fox computed that
     there were seldom less than a thousand quakers in prison.  The
     statute 13 and 14 Car. II.  cap. i. (1662) was "An act for
     preventing the mischiefs and dangers that may arise by certain
     persons called quakers and others, refusing to take lawful oaths."
     Billing is mentioned again on July 22nd, 1667, when he addressed
     Pepys in Westminster Hall.]

So after drinking with Mr. Spicer, who had received L600 for me this morning, I went to Capt.
Stone and with him by coach to the Temple Gardens (all the way talking of the disease of the
stone), where we met Mr. Squib, but would do nothing till to-morrow morning.  Thence back on
foot home, where I found a letter from my Lord in character [private cryptic code Ed.], which
I construed, and after my wife had shewn me some ribbon and shoes that she had taken out of
a box of Mr. Montagu's which formerly Mr. Kipps had left here when his master was at sea, I
went to Mr. Crew and advised with him about it, it being concerning my Lord's coming up to
Town, which he desires upon my advice the last week in my letter.  Thence calling upon Mrs.
Ann I went home, and wrote in character to my Lord in answer to his letter. Mr. Moore told
me of a picture hung up at the Exchange of a great pair of buttocks shooting of a turd into
Lawson's mouth, and over it was wrote "The thanks of the house."  Boys do now cry "Kiss my
Parliament, instead of "Kiss my [rump]," so great and general a contempt is the Rump come to
among all the good and bad.

8th.  A little practice on my flageolet, and afterwards walking in my yard to see my stock
of pigeons, which begin now with the spring to breed very fast.  I was called on by Mr. Fossan,
my fellow pupil at Cambridge, and I took him to the Swan in the Palace yard, and drank together
our morning draft.  Thence to my office, where I received money, and afterwards Mr. Carter,
my old friend at Cambridge, meeting me as I was going out of my office I took him to the Swan,
and in the way I met with Captain Lidcott, and so we three went together and drank there, the
Captain talking as high as ever he did, and more because of the fall of his brother Thurlow.

     [John Thurloe, born 1616; Secretary of State to Cromwell; M.P. for
     Ely, 1656, and for the University of Cambridge in Richard Cromwell's
     Parliament of December, 1658.  He was never employed after the
     Restoration, although the King solicited his services.  He died
     February 21st, 1668.  Pepys spells the name Thurlow, which was a
     common spelling at the time.]

Hence I went to Captain Stone, who told me how Squib had been with him, and that he could do
nothing with him, so I returned to Mr. Carter and with him to Will's, where I spent upon him
and Monsieur L'Impertinent, alias Mr. Butler, who I took thither with me, and thence to a Rhenish
wine house, and in our way met with Mr. Hoole, where I paid for my cozen Roger Pepys his wine,
and after drinking we parted.  So I home, in my way delivering a letter which among the rest
I had from my Lord to-day to Sir N. Wheeler.  At home my wife's brother brought her a pretty
black dog which I liked very well, and went away again.  Hence sending a porter with the hamper
of bottles to the Temple I called in my way upon Mrs. Jem, who was much frighted till I came
to tell her that her mother was well.  So to the Temple, where I delivered the wine and received
the money of my cos. Roger that I laid out, and thence to my father's, where he shewed me a
base angry letter that he had newly received from my uncle Robert about my brother John, at
which my father was very sad, but I comforted him and wrote an answer.  My brother John has
an exhibition granted him from the school.  My father and I went down to his kitchen, and there
we eat and drank, and about 9 o'clock I went away homewards, and in Fleet Street, received
a great jostle from a man that had a mind to take the wall, which I could not help?

     [This was a constant trouble to the pedestrian until the rule of
     passing to the right of the person met was generally accepted.  Gay
     commences his "Trivia" with an allusion to this--

          "When to assert the wall, and when resign--"

     and the epigram on the haughty courtier and the scholar is well
     known.]

I came home and to bed.  Went to bed with my head not well by my too much drinking to-day,
and I had a boil under my chin which troubled me cruelly.

9th.  Soon as out of my bed I wrote letters into the country to go by
carrier to-day.  I went with
him to Mr. Phelps's house where he had some business to solicit, where we
met Mr. Rogers my neighbour, who did solicit against him and talked very
high, saying that he would not for a L1000 appear in a business that Swan
did, at which Swan was very angry, but I believe he might be guilty
enough.  He garrisoned his house at Faringdon, which was
     besieged by his son, of the same names, a decided Republican, son-
     in-law to Hampden, and colonel of horse under Fairfax.  The son,
     here spoken of, was subsequently committed to the Tower for
     presenting a petition to the House of Commons from the county of
     Berks, which he represented in Parliament, complaining of the want
     of a settled form of government.  He had, however, the courage to
     move for an habeas corpus, but judge Newdigate decided that the
     courts of law had not the power to discharge him.  Upon Monk's
     coming to London, the secluded members passed a vote to liberate
     Pye, and at the Restoration he was appointed equerry to the King.
     He died in 1701.--B.]

this morning came to desire his discharge from the Tower; but it could not be granted.  After
that I went to Mrs. Jem, who I had promised to go along with to her Aunt Wright's, but she
was gone, so I went thither, and after drinking a glass of sack I went back to Westminster
Hall, and meeting with Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who would needs take me home, where Mr. Lucy,
Burrell, and others dined, and after dinner I went home and to Westminster Hall, where meeting
Swan I went with him by water to the Temple to our Counsel, and did give him a fee to make
a motion to-morrow in the Exchequer for Mr. Downing.  Thence Swan and I to a drinking-house
near Temple Bar, where while he wrote I played on my flageolet till a dish of poached eggs
was got ready for us, which we eat, and so by coach home.  I went home and got some ahlum to
my mouth, where I have the beginnings of a cancer, and had also a plaster to my boil underneath
my chin.

10th.  In the morning I went to Mr. Swan, who took me to the Court of Wards,  where I saw the
three Lords Commissioners sitting upon some cause where Mr. Scobell was concerned, and my Lord
Fountaine took him up very roughly about some things that he said.  After that we went to the
Exchequer, where the Barons were hearing of causes, and there I made affidavit that Mr. Downing
was gone into Holland by order of the Council of State, and this affidavit I gave to Mr. Stevens
our lawyer.  Thence to my office, where I got money of Mr. Hawly to pay the lawyer, and there
found Mr. Lenard, one of the Clerks of the Council, and took him to the Swan and gave him his
morning draft.  Then home to dinner, and after that to the Exchequer, where I heard all the
afternoon a great many causes before the Barons; in the end came ours, and Squib proved clearly
by his patent that the house and office did now belong to him.  Our lawyer made some kind of
opposition, but to no purpose, and so the cause was found against us, and the foreman of the
jury brought in L10 damages, which the whole Court cried shame of, and so he cried 12d.  Thence
I went and drank with Mr. Moore at the Sugar Loaf by Temple Bar, where Swan and I were last
night, and so we parted.  At home I found Mr. Hunt, who sat talking with me awhile, and so to bed.

11th.  This morning I lay long abed, and then to my office, where I read all the morning my
Spanish book of Rome.  The House presently after rose, and appointed to meet again at three
o'clock.  I went then down into the Hall, where I met with Mr. Chetwind, who had not dined
no more than myself, and so we went toward London, in our way calling at two or three shops,
but could have no dinner.  At last, within Temple Bar, we found a pullet ready roasted, and
there we dined.  After that he went to his office in Chancery Lane, calling at the Rolls, where
I saw the lawyers pleading.  Then to his office, where I sat in his study singing, while he
was with his man (Mr. Powell's son) looking after his business.  Here we stayed a great while,
and at last meeting with a friend of his we went to the 3 Tun tavern and drank half a pint
of wine, and not liking the wine we went to an alehouse, where we met with company of this
third man's acquaintance, and there we drank a little. Crisp, and so we went to the Star Tavern
(Monk being then at Benson's), where we dined and I wrote a letter to my Lord from thence.
We came to the Chequers at Charing Cross, where Chetwind wrote a letter and I gave him an account
of what I had wrote for him to write.  Thence home and sent my letters to the posthouse in
London, and my wife and I (after Mr. Hunt was gone, whom I found waiting at my house) went
out again to show her the fires, and after walking as far as the Exchange we returned and to bed.

12th.  In the morning, it being Lord's day, Mr. Pierce came to me to enquire how things go.
Home again, where at noon came according to my invitation my cos. Thos. Pepys and his partner
and dined with me, but before dinner we went and took a walk round the park, it being a most
pleasant day as ever I saw.  But not knowing how to see him we went and walked half a hour
in Moorfields, which were full of people, it being so fine a day.  Here I took leave of them,
and so to Paul's, where I met with Mr. Kirton's' apprentice (the crooked fellow) and walked
up and down with him two hours, sometimes in the street looking for a tavern to drink in, but
not finding any open, we durst not knock; other times in the churchyard, where one told me
that he had seen the letter printed. Thence to Mr. Turner's, where I found my wife, Mr. Edw.
Hence home, and being near home we missed our maid, and were at a great loss and went back
a great way to find her, but when we could not see her we went homewards and found her there,
got before us which we wondered at greatly.  So to bed, where my wife and I had some high words
upon my telling her that I would fling the dog which her brother gave her out of window if
he [dirtied] the house any more.

13th.  To my office till noon, thence home to dinner, my mouth being very bad of the cancer
and my left leg beginning to be sore again.  After dinner to see Mrs. Jem, and in the way met
with Catan on foot in the street and talked with her a little, so home and took my wife to
my father's.  In my way I went to Playford's, and for two books that I had and 6s. 6d. to boot
I had my great book of songs which he sells always for r 4s.  At my father's I staid a while,
while my mother sent her maid Bess to Cheapside for some herbs to make a water for my mouth.
Then I went to see Mr. Cumberland, and after a little stay with him I returned, and took my
wife home, where after supper to bed.  He did give me something for my mouth which I did use
this night.

14th.  Called out in the morning by Mr. Moore, whose voice my wife hearing in my dressing-chamber
with me, got herself ready, and came down and challenged him for her valentine, this being
the day. Hence I took him to the Swan and gave him his morning draft.  So to my office, where
Mr. Hill of Worcestershire came to see me and my partner in our office, with whom we went to
Will's to drink.  To Will's, where like a fool I staid and lost 6d. at cards.  So home, and
wrote a letter to my Lord by the post. So after supper to bed.  Called up in the morning by
Captain Holland and Captain Cuttance, and with them to Harper's, thence to my office, thence
with Mr. Hill of Worcestershire to Will's, where I gave him a letter to Nan Pepys, and some
merry pamphlets against the Rump to carry to her into the country. So to Mr. Crew's, where
the dining room being full, Mr. Walgrave and I dined below in the buttery by ourselves upon
a good dish of buttered salmon. Thence to Hering' the merchant about my Lord's Worcester money
and back to Paul's Churchyard, where I staid reading in Fuller's History of the Church of England
an hour or two, and so to my father's, where Mr. Hill came to me and I gave him direction what
to do at Worcester about the money. Thence to my Lady Wright's and gave her a letter from my
Lord privily.  So to Mrs. Jem and sat with her, who dined at Mr. Crew's to-day, and told me
that there was at her coming away at least forty gentlemen (I suppose members that were secluded,
for Mr. Walgrave told me that there were about thirty met there the last night) came dropping
in one after another thither.  Thence home and wrote into the country against to-morrow by
the carrier and so to bed.  At my father's I heard how my cousin Kate Joyce had a fall yesterday
from her horse and had some hurt thereby.

16th, In the morning at my lute.  Then came Shaw and Hawly, and I gave them their morning draft
at my house.  So to my office, where I wrote by the carrier to my Lord and sealed my letter
at Will's, and gave it old East to carry it to the carrier's, and to take up a box of china
oranges and two little barrels of scallops at my house, which Captain Cuttance sent to me for
my Lord.  Here I met with Osborne and with Shaw and Spicer, and we went to the Sun Tavern in
expectation of a dinner, where we had sent us only two trenchers-full of meat, at which we
were very merry, while in came Mr. Wade and his friend Capt. Moyse (who told us of his hopes
to get an estate merely for his name's sake), and here we staid till seven at night, I winning
a quart of sack of Shaw that one trencherfull that was sent us was all lamb and he that it
was veal.  I by having but 3d. in my pocket made shift to spend no more, whereas if I had had
more I had spent more as the rest did, so that I see it is an advantage to a man to carry little
in his pocket.  Home, and after supper, and a little at my flute, I went to bed.

17th.  In the morning Tom that was my Lord's footboy came to see me and had 10s. of me of the
money which I have to keep of his.  So that now I have but 35s. more of his.  Then came Mr.
Hills the instrument maker, and I consulted with him about the altering my lute and my viall.
After that I went into my study and did up my accounts, and found that I am about; L40 beforehand
in the world, and that is all.  So to my office and from thence brought Mr. Hawly home with
me to dinner, and after dinner wrote a letter to Mr. Downing about his business and gave it
Hawly, and so went to Mr. Gunning's to his weekly fast, and after sermon, meeting there with
Monsieur L'Impertinent, we went and walked in the park till it was dark. L'Impertinent and
I to Harper's, and there drank a cup or two to the King, and to his fair sister Frances--[Frances
Butler, the great beauty, who is sometimes styled.  la belle Boteler.]--good health, of whom
we had much discourse of her not being much the worse for the small pox, which she had this
last summer.  So home and to bed.  This day we are invited to my uncle Fenner's wedding feast,
but went not, this being the 27th year.

18th.  A great while at my vial and voice, learning to sing "Fly boy, fly boy," without book.
So to my office, where little to do.  In the Hall I met with Mr. Eglin and one Looker, a famous
gardener, servant to my Lord Salsbury, and among other things the gardener told a strange passage
in good earnest .  .  .  .  Home to dinner, and then went to my Lord's lodgings to my turret
there and took away most of my books, and sent them home by my maid.  Thither came Capt.  Holland
to me who took me to the Half Moon tavern and Mr. Southorne, Blackburne's clerk.  Thence he
took me to the Mitre in Fleet Street, where we heard (in a room over the music room) very plainly
through the ceiling. If one body gains a certain amount of energy, some other body has lost an
equivalent amount. These facts are summed up in the law of conservation of energy which may
be stated thus: While energy can be changed from one form into another, it cannot be created or
destroyed.

~Transformations of energy.~ Although energy can neither be created nor destroyed, it is evident
that it may assume many different forms. Thus the falling water may turn the electric generator
and produce a current of electricity. The energy lost by the falling water is thus transformed
into the energy of the electric current. This in turn may be changed into the energy of motion,
as when the current is used for propelling the cars, or into the energy of heat and light, as when
it is used for heating and lighting the cars. Again, the energy of coal may be converted into
energy of heat and subsequently of motion, as when it is used as a fuel in steam engines.

Since the energy possessed by coal only becomes available when the coal is made to undergo
a chemical change, it is sometimes called chemical energy. It is this form of energy in which
we are especially interested in the study of chemistry.

~Matter.~ Matter may be defined as that which occupies space and possesses weight. Like energy,
matter may be changed oftentimes from one form into another; and
since in these transformations all the other physical properties of
a substance save weight are likely to change, the inquiry arises,
Does the weight also change? Much careful experimenting has shown
that it does not. The weight of the products formed in any change
in matter always equals the weight of the substances undergoing change.
  So to supper
to my Father's, all supper talking of John's going to Cambridge.  So home, and it raining my
wife got my mother's French mantle and my brother John's hat, and so we went all along home
and to bed.

20th.  In the morning at my lute.  Then to my office, where my partner and I made even our
balance.  Took him home to dinner with me, where my brother John came to dine with me.  After
dinner I took him to my study at home and at my Lord's, and gave him some books and other things
against his going to Cambridge.  After he was gone I went forth to Westminster Hall, where
I met with Chetwind, Simons, and Gregory.  And with them to Marsh's at Whitehall to drink,
and staid there a pretty while reading a pamphlet well writ and directed to General Monk, in
praise of the form of monarchy which was settled here before the wars.

     [This pamphlet is among the Thomason Collection of Civil War Tracts
     (British Museum), and dated in MS.  this same day, February 20th--
     "A Plea for Limited Monarchy as it was established in this Nation
     before the late War.  In an Humble Address to his Excellency General
     Monck.  By a Zealot for the good old Laws of his Country, before any
     Faction or Caprice, with additions."  After a small debate
upon the question whether learned or unlearned subjects are the best the
Club broke up very poorly, and I do not think they will meet any more.
Hence with Vines, &c.  to Will's, and after a pot or two home, and so to
bed.

21st. In the morning going out I saw many soldiers going towards Westminster, and was told
that they were going to admit the secluded members again.  Here also Capt. Taylor began a discourse
of something that he had lately writ about Gavelkind in answer to one that had wrote a piece
upon the same subject; and indeed discovered a great deal of study in antiquity in his discourse.
Hence home and wrote to my Lord, afterwards came down and found Mr. Hunt (troubled at this
change) and Mr. Spong, who staid late with me singing of a song or two, and so parted. My wife
not very well, went to bed before.  This morning I met in the Hall with Mr. Fuller, of Christ's,
and told him of my design to go to Cambridge, and whither.  He told me very freely the temper
of Mr. Widdrington, how he did oppose all the fellows in the College, and that there was a
great distance between him and the rest, at which I was very sorry, for that he told me he
feared it would be little to my brother's advantage to be his pupil.

22nd.  In the morning intended to have gone to Mr. Crew's to borrow some money, but it raining
I forbore, and went to my Lord's lodging and look that all things were well there.  Then home
and sang a song to my viall, so to my office and to Will's, where Mr. Pierce found me out,
and told me that he would go with me to Cambridge, where Colonel Ayre's regiment, to which
he was surgeon, lieth.  To my father's to dinner, where nothing but a small dish of powdered
beef--[Boiled salt beef.  To powder was to sprinkle with salt, and the powdering tub a vessel
in which meat was salted.]--and dish of carrots; they being all busy to get things ready for
my brother John to go to-morrow.  After dinner, my wife staying there, I went to Mr. Crew's,
and got; L5 of Mr. Andrews, and so to Mrs. Jemimah, who now hath her instrument about her neck,
and indeed is infinitely, altered, and holds her head upright. I paid her, maid 40s. of the
money that I have received of Mr. Andrews. Hence home to my study, where I only wrote thus
much of this day's passages to this * and so out again.  Home for my lanthorn and so to my
father's, where I directed John what books to put for Cambridge.  After that to supper, where
my Uncle Fenner and my Aunt, The. Turner, and Joyce, at a brave leg of veal roasted, and were
very merry against John's going to Cambridge.  I observed this day how abominably Barebone's
windows are broke again last night.  At past 9 o'clock my wife and I went home.

23rd.  Thursday, my birthday, now twenty-seven years.  A pretty fair morning, I rose and after
writing a while in my study I went forth.  To my office, where I told Mr. Hawly of my thoughts
to go out of town to-morrow. Hither Mr. Fuller comes to me and my Uncle Thomas too, thence
I took them to drink, and so put off my uncle.  So with Mr. Fuller home to my house, where
he dined with me, and he told my wife and me a great many stories of his adversities, since
these troubles, in being forced to travel in the Catholic countries, &c.  He shewed me his
bills, but I had not money to pay him.  We parted, and I to Whitehall, where I was to see my
horse which Mr. Garthwayt lends me to-morrow.  So home, where Mr. Pierce comes to me about
appointing time and place where and when to meet tomorrow.  He brought me in the coach home.
He and Mr. Anslow being in it.  I back to the Hall, and at Mrs. Michell's shop staid talking
a great while with her and my Chaplain, Mr. Mumford, and drank a pot or two of ale on a wager
that Mr. Prin is not of the Council.  Home and wrote to my Lord the news of the choice of the
Council by the post, and so to bed.

25th.  To the Falcon, in the Petty Cury,

     [The old Falcon Inn is on the south side of Petty Cury.  It is now
     divided into three houses, one of which is the present Falcon Inn,
     the other two being houses with shops.  The Falcon yard is but
     little changed.  From the size of the whole building it must have
     been the principal inn of the town.  The room said to have been used
     by Queen Elizabeth for receptions retains its original form.--M. B.

     The Petty Cury.  The derivation of the name of this street, so well
     known to all Cambridge men, is a matter of much dispute among
     antiquaries.  (See "Notes and Queries.") The most probable meaning
     of it is the Parva Cokeria, or little cury, where the cooks of the
     town lived, just as "The Poultry," where the Poulters (now
     Poulterers) had their shops.  "The Forme of Cury," a Roll of Antient
     English Cookery, was compiled by the principal cooks of that "best
     and royalest viander of all Christian Kings," Richard the Second,
     and edited with a copious Index and Glossary by Dr. Samuel Pegge,
     1780.--M. B.]

where we found my father and brother very well.  After dressing myself, about ten o'clock,
my father, brother, and I to Mr. Widdririgton, at Christ's College, who received us very civilly,
and caused my brother to be admitted, while my father, he, and I, sat talking.  After that
done, we take leave.  I took leave on promise to sup with them, and to my Inn again, where
I dined with some others that were there at an ordinary.  After dinner my brother to the College,
and my father and I to my Cozen Angier's, to see them, where Mr. Fairbrother came to us.  Here
we sat a while talking.  After supper and some discourse then to my Inn, where I found my father
in his chamber, and after some discourse, and he well satisfied with this day's work, we went
to bed, my brother lying with me, his things not being come by the carrier that he could not
lie in the College.

26th (Sunday).  My brother went to the College to Chapel.  My father and I went out in the
morning, and walked out in the fields behind King's College, and in King's College Chapel Yard,
where we met with Mr. Fairbrother, who took us to Botolph's Church, where we heard Mr. Nicholas,
of Queen's College, who I knew in my time to be Tripos,

     [The Tripos or Bachelor of the Stool, who made the speech on Ash
     Wednesday, when the senior Proctor called him up and exhorted him to
     be witty but modest withal.  Their speeches, especially after the
     Restoration, tended to be boisterous, and even scurrilous.
     "26 Martii 1669.  Da Hollis, fellow of Clare Hall is to make a
     publick Recantation in the Bac. Schools for his Tripos speeche."
     The Tripos verses still come out, and are circulated on Ash
     Wednesday.  The list of successful candidates for honours is printed
     on the same paper, hence the term "Tripos" applied to it.]

with great applause, upon this text, "For thy commandments are broad." Thence my father and
I to Mr. Widdrington's chamber to dinner, where he used us very courteously again, and had
two Fellow Commoners at table with him, and Mr. Pepper, a Fellow of the College.  So after
a cup of drink I went to Magdalene College to get the certificate of the College for my brother's
entrance there, that he might save his year.  I met with Mr. Burton in the Court, who took
me to Mr. Pechell's chamber, where he was and Mr. Zanchy.  By and by, Mr. Pechell and Sanchy
and I went out, Pechell to Church, Sanchy and I to the Rose Tavern, where we sat and drank
till sermon done, and then Mr. Pechell came to us, and we three sat drinking the King's and
his whole family's health till it began to be dark.  Then we parted; Sanchy and I went to my
lodging, where we found my father and Mr. Pierce at the door, and I took them both and Mr.
Blayton to the Rose Tavern, and there gave them a quart or two of wine, not telling them that
we had been there before.  After this we broke up, and my father, Mr. Zanchy, and I to my Cosen
Angier to supper, where I caused two bottles of wine to be carried from the Rose Tavern; that
was drunk up, and I had not the wit to let them know at table that it was I that paid for them,
and so I lost my thanks for them.  After supper Mr. Fairbrother, who supped there with us,
took me into a room by himself, and shewed me a pitiful copy of verses upon Mr. Prinn which
he esteemed very good, and desired that I would get them given to Mr. Prinn, in hopes that
he would get him some place for it, which I said I would do, but did laugh in my sleeve to
think of his folly, though indeed a man that has always expressed great civility to me.  After
that we sat down and talked; I took leave of all my friends, and so to my Inn, where after
I had wrote a note and enclosed the certificate to Mr. Widdrington, I bade good night to my
father, and John went to bed, but I staid up a little while, playing the fool with the lass
of the house at the door of the chamber, and so to bed.

27th.  Up by four o'clock, and after I was ready, took my leave of my father, whom I left in
bed, and the same of my brother John, to whom I gave 10s. After that I gave the man 2s. for
his trouble, and went back again.  So we went to our Inn, and after eating of something, and
kissed the daughter of the house, she being very pretty, we took leave, and so that night,
the road pretty good, but the weather rainy to Ep[p]ing, where we sat and played a game at
cards, and after supper, and some merry talk with a plain bold maid of the house, we went to bed.

28th.  Up in the morning, and had some red herrings to our breakfast, while my boot-heel was
a-mending, by the same token the boy left the hole as big as it was before.  Then to horse,
and for London through the forest, where we found the way good, but only in one path, which
we kept as if we had rode through a canal all the way.  So home, where my wife and all well.
Shifted myself,--[Changed his dress.]--and so to Mr. Crew's, and then to Sir Harry Wright's,
where I found my Lord at dinner, who called for me in, and was glad to see me.  There was at
dinner also Mr. John Wright and his lady, a very pretty lady, Alderman Allen's daughter.  I
dined here with Will. Howe, and after dinner went out with him to buy a hat (calling in my
way and saw my mother), which we did at the Plough in Fleet Street by my Lord's direction,
but not as for him.  Here we met with Mr. Pierce a little before, and he took us to the Greyhound
Tavern, and gave us a pint of wine, and as the rest of the seamen do, talked very high again
of my Lord.  After we had done about the hat we went homewards, he to Mr. Crew's and I to Mrs.
Jem, and sat with her a little.  Then home, where I found Mr. Sheply, almost drunk, come to
see me, afterwards Mr. Spong comes, with whom I went up and played with him a Duo or two, and
so good night.  I was indeed a little vexed with Mr. Sheply, but said nothing, about his breaking
open of my study at my house, merely to give him the key of the stair door at my Lord's, which
lock he might better have broke than mine.

29th.  Home and dined, after dinner my wife and I by water to London, and thence to Herring's,
the merchant in Coleman Street, about L50 which he promises I shall have on Saturday next.
So to my mother's, and then to Mrs. Turner's, of whom I took leave, and her company, because
she was to go out of town to-morrow with Mr. Pepys into Norfolk.  Here my cosen Norton gave
me a brave cup of metheglin,

     [A liquor made of honey and water, boiled and fermenting.  By 12
     Charles II.  cap. 23, a grant of certain impositions upon beer, ale,
     and other liquors, a duty of 1d.  per gallon was laid upon "all
     metheglin or mead."]

the first I ever drank.  To my mother's and supped there.

She shewed me a letter to my father from my uncle inviting him to come to Brampton while he
is in the country.  So home and to bed.  This day my Lord came to the House, the first time
since he came to town; but he had been at the Council before.

