"Thank you, my dear young lady," bowed the old gnome. "It is a pleasure to be served by one
so obliging and bright. And I am glad to tell you," he added, turning to O'Day, "that it's
a fit--an exact fit. I thought I was about right. I carry things in my eye. I bought a head
once in Venice, about a foot square, and in Spain three months afterward, on my way down the
hill leading from the Alhambra to the town, there on a wall outside a bric-a-brac shop hung
a frame which I bought for ten francs, and when I got to Paris and put them together, I'll
be hanged if they didn't fit as if they had been made for each other."

"And I know the shop!" broke out Felix, to Masie's astonishment. "It's just before you get
to the small chapel on the left."

"By cracky, you're right! How long since you were there?"

"Oh, some five years now."

"Picking up things to sell here, I suppose. Spain used to be a great place for furniture and
stuffs; I've got a lot of them still--bought a whole chest of embroideries once in Seville,
or rather, at that hospital where the big Murillo hangs. You must know that picture--Moses
striking water from the rock--best thing Murillo ever did."

Felix remembered it, and he also remembered many of the important pictures in the Prado, especially
the great Velasquez and the two Goyas, and that head of Ribera which hung on the line in the
second gallery on the right as you entered. And before the two enthusiasts were aware of what
was going on around them, Masie and Fudge had slipped off to dine upstairs with her father,
Felix and the garrulous old painter still talking--renewing their memories with a gusto and
delight unknown to the old artist for years.

"And now about that frame!" the gnome at last found time to say. "I've got so little money
that I'd rather swap something for it, if you don't mind. Come down and see my stuff! It's
only in 10th Street--not twenty minutes' walk. Maybe you can sell some of my things for me.
And bring that blessed little girl--she's the dearest, sweetest thing I've seen for an age.
Your daughter?"

Felix laughed gently. "No, I wish she were. She is Mr. Kling's child."

"And your name?"

"O'Day."

"Irish, of course--well, all the same, come down any morning this week. My name is Ganger;
I'm on the fourth floor--been there twenty-two years. You'll have to walk up--we all do. Yes,
I'll expect you."

Kling, whom Felix consulted, began at once to demur. He knew all about the building on 10th
Street. More than one of his old frames--part of the clearing-out sale of some Southern homestead,
the portraits being reserved because unsalable--had resumed their careers on the walls of the
Academy as guardians and protectors of masterpieces painted by the denizens of this same old
rattletrap, the Studio Building. Some of its tenants, too, had had accounts with him--which
had been running for more than a year. Bridley, the marine painter; Manners, who took pupils;
Springlake, the landscapist; and half a dozen others had been in the habit of dropping into
his shop on the lookout for something good in Dutch cabinets at half-price, or no price at
all, until Felix, without knowing where they had come from, had put an end to the practice.

"Got a fellow up to Kling's who looks as if he had been a college athlete, and knows it all.
Can't fool him for a cent," was the talk now, instead of "Keep at the old Dutchman and you
may get it. He don't know the difference between a Chippendale sideboard and a shelf rack from
Harlem. Wait for a rainy day and go in. He'll be feeling blue, and you'll be sure to get it."

Kling, therefore, when he heard some days later, of Felix's proposed visit, began turning over
his books, looking up several past-due accounts. But Felix would have none of it.

"I'm going on a collecting tour, Mr. Kling, this lovely June morning," he laughed, "but not
for money. We will look after that later on. And I will take Masie. Come, child, get your hat.
Mr. Ganger wanted you to come, and so do I. Call Hans, Mr. Kling, if the shop gets full. We
will be back in an hour."

"Vell, you know best," answered Kling in final surrender. "Ven it comes to money, I know. You
go 'long, little Beesvings. I mind de shop."

"And I'll take Fudge," the child cried, "and we'll stop at Gramercy Park."

Fudge was out first, scampering down the street and back again before they had well closed
the door, and Masie was as restless. "Oh, I'm just as happy as I can be, Uncle Felix. You are
always so good. I never had any one to walk with until you came, except old Aunty Gossberger,
and she never let me look at anything."

Days in June--joyous days with all nature brimful with laughter--days when the air is a caress,
the sky a film of pearl and silver, and the eager mob of bud, blossom, and leaf, having burst
their bonds, are flaunting their glories, days like these are always to be remembered the world
over. But June days about Gramercy Park are to be marked in big Red Letters upon the calendar
of the year. For in Gramercy Park the almanac goes to pieces.

Everything is ahead of time. When little counter-panes of snow are still covering the baby
crocuses away off in Central Park, down in Gramercy their pink and yellow heads are popping
up all over the enclosure. When the big trees in Union Square are stretching their bare arms,
making ready to throw off the winter's sleep, every tiny branch in Gramercy is wide awake and
tingling with new life. When countless dry roots in Madison Square are still slumbering under
their blankets of straw, dreading the hour when they must get up and go to work, hundreds of
tender green fingers in Gramercy are thrust out to the kindly sun, pleading for a chance to
be up and doing.

And the race keeps up, Gramercy still ahead, until the goal of summer is won, and every blessed
thing that could have burst into bloom has settled down to enjoy the siesta of the hot season.

Masie was never tired of watching these changes, her wonder and delight increasing as the season
progressed.

In the earlier weeks there had been nothing but flower-beds covered with unsightly clods, muffled
shrubs, and bandaged vines. Then had come a blaze of tulips, exhausting the palette. And then,
but a short time before--it seemed only yesterday--every stretch of brown grass had lost its
dull tints in a coat of fresh paint, on which the benches, newly scrubbed, were set, and each
foot of gravelled walks had been raked and made ready for the little tots in new straw hats
who were then trundling their hoops and would soon be chasing their first butterflies.

And now, on this lovely June morning, summer had come--REAL SUMMER--for a mob of merry roses
were swarming up a trellis in a mad climb to reach its top, the highest blossom waving its
petals in triumph.

Felix waited until she had taken it all in, her face pressed between the bars (only the privileged
possessing a key are admitted to the gardens within), Fudge scampering up and down, wild to
get at the two gray squirrels, which some vandal has since stolen, and then, remembering his
promise to Ganger, he called her to him and continued his walk.

But her morning outing was not over. He must take her to the marble-cutter's yard, filled with
all sorts of statues, urns, benches, and columns, and show her again the ruts and grooves cut
in the big stone well-head, and tell her once more the story of how it had stood in an old
palace in Venice, where the streets were all water and everybody went visiting in boats. And
then she must stop at the florist's to see whether he had any new ferns in his window, and
have Felix again explain the difference between the big and little ferns and why the palms
had such long leaves.

She was ready now for her visit to the two old painters, but this time Felix lingered. He had
caught sight of a garden wall in the rear of an old house, and with his hand in hers had crossed
the street to study it the closer. The wall was surmounted by a solid, wrought-iron railing
into which some fifty years or more ago a gardener had twisted the tendrils of a wistaria.
The iron had cut deep, and so inseparable was the embrace that human skill could not pull them
apart without destroying them both.

As he reached the sidewalk and got a clearer view of the vine, tracing the weave of its interlaced
branches and tendrils, Masie noticed that he stopped suddenly and for a moment looked away,
lost in deep thought. She caught, too, the shadow that sometimes settled on his face, one she
had seen before and wondered over. But although her hand was still in his, she kept silent
until he spoke.

"Look, dear Masie," he said at last, drawing her to him, "see what happens to those who are
forced into traps! It was the big knot that held it back! And yet it grew on!"

Masie looked up into his thoughtful face. "Do you think the iron hurts it, Uncle Felix?" she
asked with a sigh.

"I shouldn't wonder; it would me," he faltered.

"But it wasn't the vine's fault, was it?"

"Perhaps not. Maybe when it was planted nobody looked after it, nor cared what might happen
when it grew up. Poor wistaria! Come along, darling!"

At last they turned into 10th Street, Fudge scurrying ahead to the very door of the grim building,
where a final dash brought him to Ganger's, his nose having sniffed at every threshold they
passed and into every crack and corner of the three flights of stairs.

Felix's own nostrils were now dilating with pleasure. The odor of varnish and turpentine had
brought back some old memories--as perfumes do for us all. A crumpled glove, a bunch of withered
roses, the salt breath of an outlying marsh, are often but so many fairy wands reviving comedies
and tragedies on which the curtains of forgetfulness have been rung down these many years.

Something in the aroma of the place was recalling kindred spirits across the sea, when the
door was swung wide and Ganger in a big, hearty voice, cried:

"Mr. O'Day, is it? Oh, I am glad! And that dear child, and--Hello! who invited you, you restless
little devil of a dog? Come in, all of you! I've a model, but she doesn't care and neither
do I. And this, Mr. O'Day, is my old friend, Sam Dogger--and he's no relation of yours, you
imp!"--with a bob of his grizzled head at Fudge--"He's a landscape-painter and a good one--one
of those Hudson River fellows--and would be a fine one if he would stick to it. Give me that
hat and coat, my chick-a-biddy, and I'll hang them up. And now here's a chair for you, Mr.
O'Day, and please get into it--and there's a jar full of tobacco, and if you haven't got a
pipe of your own you'll find a whole lot of corncobs on the mantelpiece and you can help yourself."

O'Day had stood smiling at the painter, Masie's hand fast in his, Fudge tiptoeing softly about,
divided between a sense of the strangeness of the place and a certainty of mice behind the
canvases. Felix knew the old fellow's kind, and recognized the note of attempted gayety in
the voice--the bravado of the poor putting their best, sometimes their only, foot foremost.

"No, I won't sit down--not yet," he answered pleasantly; "I will look around, if you will let
me, and I will try one of your pipes before I begin. What a jolly place you have here! Don't
move"--this to the model, a slip of a girl, her eyes muffled in a lace veil, one of Ganger's
Oriental costumes about her shoulders--"I am quite at home, my dear, and if you have been a
model any length of time you will know exactly what that means."

"Oh, she's my Fatima," exclaimed Ganger. "Her real name is Jane Hoggson, and her mother does
my washing, but I call her Fatima for short. She can stop work for the day. Get down off the
platform, Jane Hoggson, and talk to this dear little girl. You see, Mr. O'Day, now that the
art of the country has gone to the devil and nobody wants my masterpieces, I have become an
Eastern painter, fresh from Cairo, where I have lived for half a century--principally on Turkish
paste and pressed figs. My specialty at present--they are all over my walls, as you can see--is
dancing-girls in silk tights or without them, just as the tobacco shops prefer. I also do sheiks,
muffled to their eyebrows in bath towels, and with scimitars--like that one above the mantel.
And very profitable, too; MOST profitable, my dear sir. I get twenty doldars for a real odalisk
and fifteen for a bashi-bazouk. I can do one about every other day, and I sell one about every
other month. As for Sam Dogger here--Sam, what is your specialty? I said landscapes, Sam, when
Mr. O'Day came in, but you may have changed since we have been talking."

The wizened old gentleman thus addressed sidled nearer. He was ten years younger than Ganger,
but his thin, bloodless hands, watery eyes, their lids edged with red, and bald head covered
by a black velvet skull-cap made him look that much older.

"Nat talks too much, Mr. O'Day," he piped in a high-keyed voice. "I often tell Nat that he's
got a loose hinge in his mouth, and he ought to screw it tight or it will choke him some day
when he isn't watching. He! He!" And a wheezy laugh filled the room.

"Shut up, you old sardine! You don't talk enough. If you did you'd get along better. I'll tell
you, Mr. O'Day, what Sam does. Sam's a patcher-up--a 'puttier.' That's what he is. Sam can
get more quality out of a piece of sandpaper, a pot of varnish, and a little glue than any
man in the business. If you don't believe it, just bring in a fake Romney, or a Gainsborough,
or some old Spanish or Italian daub with the corners knocked off where the signature once was,
or a scrape down half a cheek, or some smear of a head, with half the canvas bare, and put
Sam to work on it, and in a week or less out it comes just as it left the master's easel--'Found
by his widow after his death' or 'The property of an English nobleman on whose walls it has
hung for two centuries.' By thunder! isn't it beautiful?" He chuckled. "Wonderful how these
bullfrogs of connoisseurs swallow the dealers' flies! And here am I, who can paint any blamed
thing from a hen-coop to a battle scene, doing signs for tobacco shops; and there is Sam, who
can do Corots and Rousseaus and Daubignys by the yard, obliged to stick to a varnish pot and
a scraper! Damnable, isn't it? But we don't growl, do we, Sammy? When Sammy has anything left
over, he brings half of it down to me--he lives on the floor above--and when I get a little
ahead and Sammy is behind, I send it up to him. We are the Siamese twins, Sammy and I, aren't
we, Sam? Where are you, anyway? Oh, he's after the dog, I see, moving the canvases so the little
beggar won't run a thumb-tack in his paw. Sam can no more resist a dog, my dear Mr. O'Day,
than a drunkard can a rum-mill, can you, Sam?"

"At it again, are you, Nat?" wheezed the wizened old gentleman, dusting his fingers as he reappeared
from behind the canvases, his watery eyes edged with a deeper red, due to his exertions. "Don't
pay any attention to him, Mr. O'Day. What he says isn't half true, and the half that is true
isn't worth listening to. Now tell me about that frame he's ordered. He don't want it, and
I've told him so. If you are willing to lend it to him, he'll pay you for it when the picture
is sold, which will never be, and by that time he'll--"

"Dry up, you old varnish pot!" shouted Ganger, "how do you know I won't pay for it?"

"Because your picture will never be hung--that's why!"

"Mr. Ganger did not want to buy it," broke in Felix, between puffs from one of his host's corn-cob
pipes. "He wanted to exchange something for it--'swap' he called it."

"Oh, well," wheezed Sam, "that's another thing. What were you going to give him in return,
Nat? Careful, now--there's not much left."

"Oh, maybe some old stuff, Sammy. Move along, you blessed little child--and you, too, Jane
Hoggson! You're sitting on my Venetian wedding-chest--real, too! I bought it forty years ago
in Padua. There are some old embroideries down in the bottom, or were, unless Sam has been
in here while I--Oh, no, here they are! Beg pardon, Sammy, for suspecting you. There--what
do you think of these?"

Felix bent over the pile of stuffs, which, under Ganger's continued dumpings, was growing larger
every minute--the last to see the light being part of a priest's Cope and two chasubles.

"There--that is enough!" said Felix. "This chasuble alone is worth more than the frame. We
will put the Florentine frame at ten dollars and the vestment at fifteen. What others have
you, Mr. Ganger? There's a great demand for these things when they are good, and these are
good. Where did you get them?"

"Worth more than the frame? Holy Moses!" whistled Ganger. "Why, I thought you'd want all there
was in the chest! And you say there are people out of a lunatic asylum looking for rags like
this?" And he held up one end of the cope.

"Yes, many of them. To me, I must say, they are worth nothing, as I don't like the idea of
mixing up church and state. But Mr. Kling's customers do, and if they choose to say their prayers
before a chasuble on a priest's back on Sunday and make a sofa cushion of it the next day,
that is their affair, not mine. And now, what else? You spoke of some costumes this morning."

"Yes, I did speak of my costumes, but I'm afraid they are too modern for you--I make 'em up
myself. Get up, Jane, and let Mr. O'Day see what you've got on!"

Jane jumped to her feet, looking less Oriental than ever, her spangled veil having dropped
about her shoulders, her red hair and freckled face now in full view.

"I think her dress is beautiful, Uncle Felix," whispered Masie.

"Do you, sweetheart? Well, then, maybe I might better look again. What else have you in the
way of Costumes, Mr. Ganger?"

Dogger stepped up. "He hasn't got a single thing worth a cent; he buys these pieces down in
Elizabeth Street, out of push-carts, and Jane Hoggson's mother sews them together. But, my
deary"--here he laid his hand on Masie's head--"would you like to see some REAL ONES, all-gold-and-silver
lace--and satin shoes--and big, high bonnets with feathers?"

Masie clapped her hands in answer and began whirling about the room, her way of telling everybody
that she was too happy to keep still.

"Well, wait here; I won't be a minute."

"Sam's fallen in love with her, too," muttered Ganger, "and I don't blame him. Come here, you
darling, and let me talk to you. Do you know you are the first little girl that's ever been
inside this place for ever--and ever and EVER--so long? Think of that, will you? Not one single
little girl since--Oh, well, I just can't remember--it's such an awful long time. Dreadful,
isn't it? Hear that old Sam stumbling down-stairs! Now let's see what he brings you."

Dogger's arms were full. "I've a silk dress," he puffed, "and a ruffled petticoat, and a great
leghorn hat--and just look at these feathers, and you never saw such a pair of slippers and
silk stockings! And now let's try 'em on!"

The child uttered a little scream of delight. "Oh, Uncle Felix! Isn't it lovely? Can't I have
them? Please, Uncle Felix!" she cried, both hands around his shirt collar in supplication.

"Take 'em all, missy," shouted Sam. Then, turning to Felix: "They belonged to an actor who
hired half of my studio and left them to pay for his rent, which they didn't do, not by a long
chalk, and--Oh, here's another hat--and, oh, such a lovely old cloak! Yes, take 'em all, missy--I'm
glad to get rid of 'em--before Nat claps them on Jane and goes in for Puritan maidens and Lady
Gay Spankers. Oh, I know you, Nat! I wouldn't trust you out of my sight! Take 'em along, I
say." He stopped and turned toward Felix again.

"Couldn't you bring her down here once in a while, Mr. O'Day?" he continued, a strange, pathetic
note in his wheezing voice. "Just for ten minutes, you know, when she's out with the dog, or
walking with you. Nobody ever comes up these stairs but tramps and book agents--even the models
steer clear. It would help a lot if you'd bring her. Wouldn't you like to come, missy? What
did you say her name was? Oh, yes--Masie--well, my child, that's not what I'd call you; I'd
call you--well, I guess I wouldn't call you anything but just a dear, darling little girl!
Yes, that's just what I'd call you. And you are going to let me give them to her, aren't you,
Mr. O'Day?"

Felix grasped the old fellow's thin, dry hand in his own strong fingers. For an instant a strange
lump in his throat clogged his speech. "Of course, I'll take the costumes, and many thanks
for your wish to make the child happy," he answered at last. "I am rather foolish about Masie
myself; and may I tell you, Mr. Dogger, that you are a very fine old gentleman, and that I
am delighted to have made your acquaintance, and that, if you will permit me I shall certainly
come again?"

Dogger was about to reply when Masie, Looking up into the wizened face, cried: "And may I put
them on when I like, if I'm very, very--oh, so VERY careful?"

"Yes, you buttercup, and you can wear them full of holes and do anything else you please to
them, and I won't care a mite."

And then, with Jane Hoggson's help, he put on Masie's own hat and coat, which Ganger had hung
on an easel, and Masie called Fudge from his mouse-hole, and Felix shook hands first with Nat
and then with Sam, and last of all with Jane, who looked at him askance out of one eye as she
bobbed him half a courtesy. And then everybody went out into the hall and said good-by once
more over the banisters, Felix with the bundle under his arm, Masie throwing kisses to the
two old gnomes craning their necks over the banisters, Fudge barking every step of the way
down the stairs.

Chapter VI

The glimpse which Felix had caught of these two poor, unappreciated old men, living contentedly
from hand to mouth, gayly propping each other up when one or the other weakened, had strangely
affected him. If, as he reasoned, such battered hulks, stranded these many years on the dry
sands of incompetency, with no outlook for themselves across the wide sea over which their
contemporaries were scudding with all sails set before the wind of success--if these castaways,
their past always with them and their hoped-for future forever out of their reach, could laugh
and be merry, why should not he carry some of their spirit into his relations with the people
among whom his lot was now thrown?

That these people had all been more than good to him, and that he owed them in return something
more than common politeness now took possession of his mind. Few such helping hands had ever
been held out to him. When they had been, the proffered palm had generally concealed a hidden
motive. Hereafter he would try to add what he could of his own to the general fund of good-fellowship
and good deeds.

He would continue his nightly search--and he had not missed a single evening--but he would
return earlier, so as to be able to spend an hour reading to Masie before she went to bed,
or with his other friends and acquaintances of "The Avenue"--especially with Kitty and John.
He had been too unmindful of them, getting back to his lodgings at any hour of the night, either
to let himself in by his pass-key--all the lights out and everybody asleep--or to find only
Kitty or John, or both, at work over their accounts or waiting up for Mike or Bobby or for
one of their wagons detained on some dock. And since Kling had raised his salary, enabling
him not only to recover his dressing-case, which then rested on his mantel, but to take his
meals wherever he happened to be at the moment--he had seldom dined at home--a great relief
in many ways to a man of his tastes.

Kitty, though he did not know it, had demurred and had talked the matter over with John, wondering
whether she had neglected his comfort. When she had questioned him, he had settled it with
a pat on her shoulders. "Just let me have my way this time, my dear Mrs. Cleary," he had said
gently but firmly. "I am a bad boarder and cause you no end of trouble, for I am never on time.
And please keep the price as it is, for I don't pay you half enough for all your goodness to me."

Now under the impulse of his new resolution, and rather ashamed of his former attitude in view
of all her unremitting attentions, he resumed his place at her table. Nor did he stop here.
He taught her to broil a chop over her coal fire by removing the stove lid--until then they
had been fried--and a new way with a rasher of bacon, using the carving-fork instead of a pan.
The clearing of the famous coffee-pot with an egg--making the steaming mixture anew whenever
wanted instead of letting the dented old pot simmer away all day on the back of the stove--was
another innovation, making the evening meal just that much more enjoyable, greatly to the delight
of the hostess, who was prouder of her boarder than of any other human being who had come into
her life, except John and Bobby.

These renewed intimacies opened his eyes to another phase of the life about him, and he soon
found himself growing daily more interested in the sweet family relations of the small household.

"What do I care for what we haven't got," Kitty said to him one night when some economies in
the small household were being discussed. "I'm better off than half the women who stop at my
door in their carriages. I got two arms, and I can sleep eight hours when I get the chance,
and John loves me and so does Bobby and so does my big white horse Jim. There ain't one of
them women as knows what it is to work for her man and him to work for her." All the other
married couples he had seen had pulled apart, or lived apart--mentally, at least. These two
seemed bound together heart and soul.

More than once he contrived to stop at the Studio Building, where both of the old fellows were
almost always to be found sitting side by side, and, picking them up bodily, he had set them
down on hard chairs in a rathskeller on Sixth Avenue, where they had all dined together, the
old fellows warmed up with two beers apiece. This done, he had escorted them back, seen them
safely up-stairs, and returned to his lodgings.

It was after one of these mild diversions that, before going to his room, he pushed open the
door of the Clearys' sitting-room with a cheery "May I come in, Mistress Kitty?"

"Oh, but I'm glad to see ye!" was the joyous answer. "I was sayin' to myself: 'Maybe ye'd come
in before he went.' Here's Father Cruse I been tellin' ye about--and, Father, here's Mr. O'Day
that's livin' wid us."

A full-chested man of forty, in a long black cassock, standing six feet in his stockings, his
face alight with the glow of a freshly kindled pleasure, rose from his chair and held out his
hand. "The introduction should be quite unnecessary, Mr. O'Day," he exclaimed in the full,
sonorous voice of a man accustomed to public speaking. "You seem to have greatly attached these
dear people to you, which in itself is enough, for there are none better in my parish."

Felix, who had been looking the speaker over, taking in his thoughtful face, deep black eyes,
and more especially the heavy black eyebrows that lay straight above them, felt himself warmed
by the hearty greeting and touched by its sincerity. "I agree with you, Father, in your praise
of them," he said as he grasped the priest's hand. "They have been everything to me since my
sojourn among them. And, if I am not mistaken, you and I have something else in common. My
people are from Limerick."

"And mine from Cork," laughed the priest as he waved his hand toward his empty chair, adding:
"Let me move it nearer the table."

"No, I will take my old seat, if you do not mind. Please do not move, Mr. Cleary; I am near
enough."

"And are you an importation, Father, like myself?" continued Felix, shifting the rocker for
a better view of the priest.

"No. I am only an Irishman by inheritance. I was brought up on the soil, born down in Greenwich
village--and a very queer old part of the town it is. Strange to say, there are very few changes
along its streets since my boyhood. I found the other day the very slanting cellar door I used
to slide on when I was so high! Do you know Greenwich?"

He was sitting upright as he spoke, his hands hidden in the folds of his black cassock, wondering
meanwhile what was causing the deep lines on the brow of this high-bred, courteous man, and
the anxious look in the deep-set eyes. As priest he had looked into many others, framed in
the side window of the confessional--the most wonderful of all schools for studying human nature--but
few like those of the man before him; eyes so clear and sincere, yet shadowed by what the priest
vaguely felt was some overwhelming sorrow.

"Oh, yes, I know it as I know most of New York," Felix was saying; "it is close to Jefferson
Market and full of small houses, where I should think people could live very cheaply"; adding,
with a sigh, "I have walked a great deal about your city," and as suddenly checked himself,
as if the mere statement might lead to discussion.

Kitty, who had been darning one of John's gray yarn stockings--the needle was still between
her thumb and forefinger--leaned forward. "That's the matter with him, Father, and he'll never
be happy until he stops it," she cried. "He don't do nothin' but tramp the streets until I
think he'd get that tired he'd go to sleep standin' up."

Felix turned toward her. "And why not, Mrs. Cleary?" he asked with a smile. "How can I learn
anything about this great metropolis unless I see it for myself?"

"But it's all Sunday and every night! I get that worried about ye sometimes, I'm ready to cry.
And ye won't listen to a thing I say! I been waitin' for Father Cruse to get hold of ye, and
I'm goin' to say what's in my mind." Here she looked appealingly to the priest. "Now, ye just
talk to him, Father, won't ye, please?"

The priest, laughing heartily, raised his protesting hands toward her. "If he fails to heed
you, Mrs. Cleary, he certainly won't listen to me. What do you say for yourself, Mr. O'Day?"

Felix twisted his head until he could address his words more directly to his hostess. "Please
keep on scolding me, my dear Mrs. Cleary. I love to hear you. But there is Father Cruse, why
not sympathize with him? He tramps to some purpose. I am only the Wandering Jew, who does it
for exercise."

Kitty held the point of the darning-needle straight out toward Felix. "But why must you do
it Sundays, Mr. O'Day? That's what I want to know."

"But Sunday is my holiday."

"Yes, and there's early mass. Ye'd think he'd come, wouldn't ye, Father?"

One of O'Day's low, murmuring laughs, that always sounded as if he had grown unaccustomed to
letting the whole of it pass his lips, filtered through the room.

"You see what a heathen I am, Father," he exclaimed. "But I am going to turn over a new leaf.
I shall honor myself by visiting St. Barnabas's some day very soon, and shall sit in the front
pew--or, perhaps, in yours, Mrs. Cleary, if you will let me--now that I know who officiates,"
and he inclined his head graciously toward the priest. "I hope the service is not always in
the morning!"

"Oh, no, we have a service very often at night, sometimes at eight o'clock."

"And how long does that last?"

"Perhaps an hour."

"And so if I should come at eight and wait until you are free, you could give me, perhaps,
another hour of yourself?"

"Yes, and with the greatest pleasure. But why at those hours?" asked the priest with some curiosity.

"Because I am very busy at other times. But I want to be quite frank. If I come, it will not
be because I need your service, but because I shall want to see YOU. Your church is not my
church, and never has been, but your people--especially your priests--have always had my admiration
and respect. I have known many of your brethren in my time. One in particular, who is now very
old--a dear abbe, living in Paris. Heaven is made up of just such saints."

The priest clasped his hands together. "We have many such, sir," he replied solemnly. The acknowledgment
came reverently, with a gleam that shone from under the heavy brows.

Felix caught its brilliance, and the sense of a certain bigness in the man passed through him.
He had been prepared for his quiet, well-bred dignity. All the priests he had known were thoroughbreds
in their manner and bearing; their self-imposed restraint, self-effacement, absence of all
unnecessary gesture, and modulated voices had made them so; but the warmth of this one's underlying
nature was as unexpected as it was pleasurable.

"Yes, you have many such," O'Day repeated simply after a slight pause during which his thoughts
seemed to have wandered afar. "And now tell me," he asked, rousing himself to renewed interest,
"where your work lies--your real work, I mean. The mass is your rest."

The priest turned quickly. He wondered if there were a purpose behind the question. "Oh, among
my people," he answered, the slow, even, non-committal tones belying the eagerness of his gesture.

"Yes, I know; but go on. This is a great city--greater than I had ever supposed--greater, in
many ways, than London. The luxury and waste are appalling; the misery is more appalling still.
What sort of men and women do you put your hands on?"

"Here are some of them," answered the priest, his forefinger pointing to Kitty and John.

"We could all of us do without churches and priests," ventured Felix, his eyes kindling, "if
your parishioners were as good as these dear people."

"Well, there's Bobby," laughed the priest, his face turned toward the boy, who was sound asleep
in his chair, Toodles, the door-mat of a dog, sprawled at his feet.

"And are there no others, Father Cruse?"

The priest, now convinced of a hidden meaning in the insistent tones, grew suddenly grave,
and laid his hand on O'Day's knee. "Come and see me some time, and I will tell you. My district
runs from Fifth Avenue to the East River, from the homes of the rich to the haunts of the poor,
and there is no form of vice and no depth of suffering the world over that does not knock daily
at my study door. Do not let us talk about it here. Perhaps some day we may work together,
if you are willing."

Kitty, who had been listening, her heart throbbing with pride over Felix, who had held his
own with her beloved priest, and still fearing that the talk would lead away from what was
uppermost in her mind--O'Day's welfare--now sprang from her chair before Felix could reply.
"Of course he'll come, Father, once he's seen ye."

"Yes, I will," answered Felix cordially. "And it will not be very long either, Father. And
now I must say good night. It has been a real pleasure to meet you. You have been a most kindly
grindstone to a very dull and useless knife, and I am greatly sharpened up. After all, I think
we both agree that it is rather difficult to keep anything bright very long unless you rub
it against something still brighter and keener. Thank you again, Father," and with a pat of
his fingers on Kitty's shoulder as he passed, and a good night to John, he left the room on
his way to his chamber above.

Kitty waited until the sound of O'Day's footsteps told her that he had reached the top of the
stairs and then turned to the priest. "Well, what do ye think of him? Have I told ye too much?
Did ye ever know the beat of a man like that, livin' in a place like this and eatin' at my
table, and never a word of complaint out o' him, and everybody lovin' him the moment they clap
their two eyes on him?"

The priest made no immediate answer. For some seconds he gazed into the fire, then looked at
John as if about to seek some further enlightenment, but changing his mind faced Kitty. "Is
his mail sent here?"

"What? His letters?"

"Yes."

"He don't have any--not one since he's been wid us."

"Anybody come to see him?"

"Niver a soul."

The priest ruminated for a moment more, and then said slowly, as if his mind were made up:
"It does not matter; somebody or something has hurt him, and he has gone off to die by himself.
In the old days such men sought the monasteries; to-day they try to lose themselves in the crowd."

Again he ruminated, the delicate antennae of his hands meeting each other at the tips.

"A most extraordinary case," he said at last. "No malice, no bitterness--yet eating his heart
out. Pitiful, really; and the worst thing about it is that you can't help him, for his secret
will die with him. Bring him to me sometime, and let me know before you come so I may be at home."

"You don't think there's anything crooked about him, Father, do you?" said John, who had sat
tilted back against the wall and now brought the front legs of his chair to the floor with a bang.

"What do you mean by crooked. John?" asked the priest.

"Well, he blew in here from nowheres, bringin' a couple of trunks and a hat-box, and not much
in 'em, from what Kitty says. And he might blow out again some fine night, leavin' his own
full of bricks, carting off instead some I keep on storage for my customers, full of God knows
what!--but somethin' that's worth money, or they wouldn't have me take care of 'em. There ain't
nothin' to prevent him, for he's got the run of the place day and night. And Kitty's that dead
stuck on him she'll believe anything he says."

Kitty wheeled around in her seat, her big strong fist tightly clinched. "Hold your tongue,
John Cleary!" she cried indignantly. "I'd knock any man down--I don't care how big he was--that
would be a-sayin' that of ye without somethin' to back it up, and that's what'll happen to
ye if ye don't mend your manners. Can't ye see, Father, that Mr. Felix O'Day is the real thing,
and no sham about him? I do, and Kling does, and so does that darlin' Masie, and every man,
woman, and child around here that can get their hands on him or a word wid him. Shame on ye,
John! Tell him so, Father Cruse!"

The priest kept silent, waiting until the slight family squall--never very long nor serious
between John and Kitty--had spent itself.

"Well, I'm not sayin' anything against Mr. O'Day, Kitty," broke in John. "I'm only askin' for
information. What do you think of him, Father? What's he up to, anyhow? There ain't any of
'em can fool ye. I don't want to watch him--I ain't got no time--and I won't if he's all right."

The priest rose from his chair and stood looking down at Kitty, his hands clasped behind his
back. "You believe in him, do you not?"

"I do--up to the handle-and I don't care who knows it!"

"Then I would not worry, John Cleary, if I were you."

"Well, what does she know about it, Father?"

"What every good woman always knows about every good man. And now I must go."

Chapter VII

As was to be expected, Kitty's first words to O'Day on the following morning related to his
meeting with Father Cruse. "Ye'll not find a better man anywhere," she had said to him, "and
there ain't a trouble he can't cure."

Felix had smiled at her enthusiasm for her idol and comforted her by saying that it had given
him distinct pleasure to meet him, adding: "A big man with a big soul, that priest of yours,
Mistress Kitty. I begin to see now why you and your husband lead such human lives. Yes--a fine
man."

But no closer intimacy ensued, nor did he pursue the acquaintance--not even on the following
Sunday, when Kitty urged him, almost to importunity, to go and hear the Father say mass. He
was not ready as yet, he said to himself, for friendships among men of his own intellectual
caliber. In the future he might decide otherwise. For the present, at least, he meant to find
whatever peace and comfort he could among the simple people immediately around him--meagrely
educated, often strangely narrow-minded, but possessing qualities which every day aroused in
him a profounder admiration.

With the quick discernment of the man of the world--one to whom many climes and many people
were familiar--he had begun to discover for himself that this great middle class was really
the backbone of the whole civil structure about him, its self-restraint, sanity, and cleanliness
marking the normal in the tide-gauge of the city's activities; the hysteria of the rich and
the despair of the poor being the two extremes.

Here, as he repeatedly observed, were men absorbed in their several humble occupations, proud
of their successes, helpful of those who fell by the wayside, good citizens and good friends,
honest in their business relations, each one going about his appointed task and leaving the
other fellow unmolested in his. Here, too, were women, good mothers to their children and good
wives to their husbands, untiring helpmates, regarding their responsibilities as mutual, and
untroubled as yet by thoughts of their own individual identities or what their respective husbands
owed to them.

This was why, instead of renewing his acquaintance with Father Cruse, he preferred to halt
for a few minutes' talk with some one of Kitty's neighbors--it might be the liveryman next
door who had been forty years on the Avenue, or one of the shopkeepers near by, most of whom
were welcome to Kitty's sitting-room and kitchen, and all of whom had shared her coffee. Or
it might be that he would call at Digwell's, whose undertaker's shop was across the way and
whose door was always open, the gas burning as befitted one liable to be called upon at any
hour of the day or night; or perhaps he would pass the time of day with Pestler, the druggist;
or give ten minutes to Porterfield, listening to his talk about the growing prices of meat.

Had you asked his former associates why a man of O'Day's intelligence should have cultivated
the acquaintance of an undertaker like Digwell, for instance, whose face was a tombstone, his
movements when on duty those of a crow stepping across wet places in a cornfield, they would
have shaken their heads in disparaging wonder. Had you asked Felix he would have answered with
a smile: "Why to hear Digwell laugh!" And then, warming to his subject, he would have told
you what a very jolly person Digwell really was, if you were fortunate enough to find him unoccupied
in his private den, way back in the rear of his shop. How he had entertained him by the hour
with anecdotes of his early life when he was captain of a baseball team, and what fun he had
gotten out of it, and did still, when he could sneak away to help pack the benches.

Had you inquired about Pestler, the druggist, there would have followed some such reply as:
"Pestler? Did you say? Because Pestler is one of the most surprising men I know. He has kept
that same shop, he tells me, for twenty-two years. Of course, he knows only a very little about
drugs--just enough to keep him out of the hands of the police--but then none of you are aware,
perhaps, that Pestler is also a student? You might think, when you saw only the top of his
fuzzy, half-bald head sticking up above the wooden partition, that he was putting up a prescription,
but you would be wrong. What he is really doing, with the aid of his microscope, is dissecting
bugs, and pasting them on glass slides for use in the public schools. And he plays the violin--and
very well, too! He often entertains me with his music."

Sanderson, the florist, was another denizen who interested him. To look at Sanderson tying
ribbons on funeral wreaths, no one would ever have supposed that there was rarely a first night
at the opera at which he was not present, paying for his ticket, too, and rather despising
Pestler, who got his theatre tickets free because he allowed the managers the use of his windows
for advertisements. Felix forgave even his frozen roses whenever the Scotchman, having found
a sympathetic listener, launched out upon his earlier experiences among opera stars, especially
his acquaintance with Patti, whom he had known before she became great and whom he always spoke
of as devotees do of the Madonna--with bated breath and a sigh of despair that he would never
hear her again.

Then, too, there was Codman. O'Day was always enthusiastic over Codman. "I have taken a great
fancy to that fishmonger, and a fine fellow he is," he said one night to Kitty and John. "His
shop was shut when I first called on him, but he was good enough to open it at my knock, and
I have just spent half an hour, and a very delightful half-hour, watching him handle the sea
food, as he calls it, in his big refrigerator. I got a look, too, at his chest and his arms,
and at his pretty wife and children. She is really the best type of the two. American, you
say, both of them, and a fine pair they are, and he tells me he pulled a surf-boat in your
coast-guard when he was a lad of twenty, then took up fishing, and then went into Fulton Market,
helping at a stall, and now he is up here with two delivery wagons and four assistants and
is a member of a fish union, whatever that is. It's astonishing! And yet I have met him many
a time pushing his baby-carriage around the block."

"Yes," Kitty answered, putting on a shovel of coal, "and I'll lay ye a wager, Mr. O'Day, that
Polly Codman will be drivin' through Central Park in her carriage before five years is out;
and she deserves it, for there ain't a finer woman from here to the Battery."

"I am quite sure of it, Mistress Kitty. That is where the American comes in--or, perhaps it
is the New Yorker. I have not been here long enough to find out."

Of all these neighbors, however, it was Timothy Kelsey, the hunchback, largely because of his
misfortunes and especially because of his vivid contrast to all the others, who appealed to
him most. Tim, as has been said, kept the second-hand book-shop, half-way down the block on
the opposite side of the street. He was but a year or two older than O'Day, but you would never
have supposed it had Tim not told you--and not then unless you had looked close and followed
the lines of care deep cut in his face and the wrinkles that crowded close to his deep, hollowed-out
eyes. When he was a boy of two, his sister, a girl of six, had let him drop to the sidewalk,
and he had never since straightened his back. I Set my self down on the Side of the Bank and
the Chiefs & brave men of the Ricaras & Chyennes formed a Cercle around me. after takeing
a Smoke of Mandan tobacco which the Big white Chief who was Seated on my left hand furnished,
I informed them as I had before informed the Mandans & Menitarras, where we had been what we had
done and Said to the different nations in there favour and envited Some of their Chiefs to accompany
us down and See their great father and receve from his own mouth
his good Councils and from his own hands his bountifull gifts &c.
telling pretty much the Same which I had told the mandans and menitarras.
told them not to be afraid of any nation below that none would hurt
them &c. a man of about 32 years of age was intreduced to me as 1st
Chief of the nation this man they Call the grey eyes or he was absent
from the Nation at the time we passed up, the man whome we had acknowledged
as the principal chief informed me that the Grey eyes was a greater
Chief than himself and that he had given up all his pretentions with
the Flag and Medal to the Grey eyes- The principal chief of the Chyenne's
was then introduced he is a Stout jolley fellow of about 35 years
of age whome the Ricaras Call the Grey Eyes I also told the ricaras
that I was very Sorrey to here that they were not on friendly terms
with their neighbours the Mandans & Menetarras, and had not listened
to what we had Said to them but had Suffered their young men to join
the Sieoux who had killed 8 Mandans &c. that their young men had Stolen
the horses of the Minetarras, in retaliation for those enjories the
Mandans & Menetarras had Sent out a war party and killed 2 ricaras.
how could they expect other nations would be at peace with them when
they themselves would not listen to what their great father had told
them.

I further informed them that the Mandans & Menetaras had opened their ears to what we had
Said to them but had Staid at home untill they were Struk that they were Still disposed to be
friendly and on good terms with the ricaras, they then Saw the great Chief of the Mandans by my
Side who was on his way to see his great father, and was derected by his nation & the Menetaras
& Maharhas, to Smoke in the pipe of peace with you and to tell you not to be afraid to go to
their towns, or take the Birds in the plains that their ears were
open to our Councils and no harm Should be done to a Ricara.

The Chief will Speak presently The Grey eyes Chief of the ricaras made a very animated Speach
in which he mentioned his williness of following the councels which
we had given them that they had Some bad young men who would not listen
to the Councels but would join the Seioux, those men they had discarded
and drove out of their villages, that the Seioux were the Cause of
their Missunderstanding &c. that they were a bad peoples. that they
had killed Several of the Ricaras Since I Saw them.

That Several of the chiefs wished to accompany us down to See their
great father, but wished to see the Chief who went down last Sumer
return first, he expressed Some apprehention as to the Safty of that
Chiefs in passing the Sieoux. that the Ricaras had every wish to be
friendly with the Mandans &c. that every mandan &c. who chose to visit
the ricares should be Safe that he Should Continue with his nation
and See that they followed the Council which we had given them &c.-
The Sun being very hot the Chyenne Chief envited us to his Lodge which
was pitched in the plain at no great distance from the River.

I accepted the invitation and accompanied him to his lodge which was new and much larger than
any which I have Seen it was made of 20 dressed Buffalow Skins in the Same form of the Sceoux
and lodges of other nations of this quarter. about this lodges was 20 others Several of them
of nearly the Same Size.

I enquired for the ballance of the nation and was informed that they were near at hand and would
arive on tomorrow and when all together amounted to 120 Lodges after Smokeing I gave a medal
of the Small size to the Chyenne Chief &c. which appeared to alarm him, he had a robe and a fleece
of fat Buffalow meat brought and gave me with the meadel back and informed me that he knew
that the white people were all medecine and that he was afraid of the midal or any thing that
white people gave to them.

I had previously explained the cause of my gveing him the medal &
flag, and again told him the use of the medal and the caus of my giveing
it to him, and again put it about his neck delivering him up his preasent
of a roab & meat, informing him that this was the medecene which his
Great father directed me to deliver to all the great Chiefs who listened
to his word and followed his councils, that he had done So and I should
leave the medal with him as a token of his cincerity &c. he doubled
the quantity of meat, and received the medal

The Big White chief
of the Mandans Spoke at some length explainin the Cause of the misunderstanding
between his nation and the ricaras, informing them of his wish to
be on the most freindly termes &c. the Chyennes accused both nations
of being in folt.

I told to them all that if they eve wished to be hapy that they must
Shake off all intimecy with the Seioux and unite themselves in a Strong
allience and attend to what we had told them &c. which they promesed
all to do and we Smoked and parted on the best terms, the Mandan Chief
was Saluted by Several Chiefs and brave men on his way with me to
the river- I had requested the ricaras & Chyennes to inform me as
Soon as possible of their intentions of going down with us to See
their great father or not. in the evening the Great Chief requested
that I would walk to his house which I did, he gave me about 2 quarts
of Tobacco, 2 beaver Skins and a trencher of boiled Corn & beans to
eat (as it is the Custom of all the Nations on the Missouri to give
Something to every white man who enters their lodge Something to eat)
this Chief informed me that none of his Chiefs wished to go down with
us they all wished to See the cheif who went down return first, that
the Chyennes were a wild people and were afraid to go. that they Should
all listen to what I had Said.

I gave him Some ribon to Suspend his Medal to and a Shell which the Snake indians gave me for which
he was very much pleased.

The interpreter informed me that the Cheifs of those villages had no intention of going down.
one the Cheifs of the Village on the island talkd. of going down.

I returned to the boat where I found the principal Chief of the lower vilege who had Cut part
of his hair and disfigured himself in Such a manner that I did not know him, he informed me the
Sieux had killed his nephew and that Was in tears for him &c. we deturmind to proceed down to
the Island and accordingly took the chief on board and proceeded
on down to the isd village at which place we arived a little before
dark and were met as before by nearly every individual of the Village,
we Saluted them and landed imediately opposit the town.

The one arm 2d Cheif of this village whome we had expected to accompany us down Spoke to the
mandan Cheif in a loud and thretening tone which Caused me to be Some what alarmed for the Safty
of that Cheif, I inform the Ricaras of this village that the Mandans had opened their ears
to and fold. our Councils, that this Cheif was on his way to see their Great Father the P. of
U S. and was under our protection that if any enjorey was done to him by any nation that we
Should all die to a man. I told the Ricaras that they had told us lies, they promised to be
at peace with the mandans & Menetarras. that our back was Scrcely
turned before they went to war & Killd. them and Stole their horses
&c- The Cheif then envited me & the Mandan Chief to his house to talk
there.

I accompanied him, after takeing a very Serimonious Smoke the 2d Cheif informd. me that he
had opened his ears to what we had Said to him at the time we gave him the medal that he had
not been to war against any Natn. Since, that once been to See the mandans and they were going
to kill him, they had not killed the Mandans, it was the Seeoux who
killed them and not the ricaras, he Said that the Mandan Cheif was
as Safe as if he was in his own Vilg that he had opened his ears and
Could here as well as the mandans.

I then informd them what I had told the upper villages and we all become perfectly reconsiled all to
each other and Smoked in the most perfect harmony we had invatations to go into their lodges
and eate.

I at length went to the grand Chiefs Lodge by his particelar invitation, the Mandan Chief Stuck
close to me the Chief had prepd. a Supper of boiled young Corn, beens
& quashes of which he gave me in Wooden bowls. he also gave me near
2 quarts of the Tobacco Seed, & informed me he had always had his
ears open to what we had Said, that he was well convinced that the
Seeoux was the caus of all the trouble between the Mandans & them
the Ricars had Stolen horses from the Mandan which had been returned
all except one which could not be got, this mischief was done by Some
young men who was bad. a long Conversation of explanations took place
between the Ricara & mandan Chiefs which appeared to be Satisfactory
on both Sides. the Chief gave a pipe with great form and every thing
appeared to be made up.

I returned to the river & went to bead. the Indians contd on board. made 22 miles today only.

[Clark,
August 22, 1806] Friday 22nd August 1806. rained all the last night
every person and all our bedding wet, the Morning cloudy, at 8 A M.
I was requested to go to the Chiefs, I walkd up and he informed me
that he Should not go down but would Stay and take Care of the village
and prevent the young men from doing rong and Spoke much to the Same
porpt of the Grey Eyes, the 2d Chief Spoke to the Same and all they
Said was only a repitition of what they had Said before. the Chief
gave me some Soft Corn and the 2d Chief Some Tobacco Seed- the Interpreter
Garrow informed me that he had been Speeking to the Chiefs & warriers
this morning and assured me that they had no intention of going down
untill the return of the Cheif who went down last Spring was a year.

I told the Cheifs to attend to what we had Said to them, that in
a Short time they would find our words tru and Councils good. they
promised to attend Strictly to what had been Said to them, and observed
that they must trade with the Sieoux one more time to get guns and
powder; that they had no guns or powder and had more horses than they
had use for, after they got guns and powder that they would never
again have any thing to do with them &c. &c. I returned the Canoes
& derected the men to prepare to Set out.

Some Chyennes from two Lodges on the Main S E. Shore Came and Smoked
with me and at 11 A. M we Set out haveing parted with those people
who appeared to be Sorry to part with us. at this nation we found
a french man by the name of Rokey who was one of our Engagees as high
as the Mandans this man had Spend all his wages, and requested to
return with uswe agreed to give him a passage down.

I directed 2 guns to be fired. we proceeded on passed the Marapa and the We ter hoo Rivers, and
landed to dry our bedding and robes &c which were all wet. here we delayed untill 6 P M. and dryed
our things which were much Spoiled.

I derected 5 of the hunters to proceed on to Grouse Island a fiew
miles below and hunt on that island untill we arived, we proceded
on to the main N E Shore below the Island and encamped, the hunters
joined us without any thing. they Saw no game on the island. we made
only 17 Miles to day. below the ricaras the river widens and the Sand
bars are emencely noumerous much less timber in the bottoms than above

The
Chyenne's are portly Indians much the complections of the Mandans
& ricaras high Cheeks, Streight limbed & high noses the men are large,
their dress in Sumner is Simpelly a roab of a light buffalow Skin
with or without the hair and a Breach clout & mockerson Some ware
leagins and mockersons, their ornaments are but fiew and those are
composed principally of Such articles as they precure from other indians
Such as blue beeds, Shell, red paint rings of brass broaches &c. they
also ware Bears Claws about their necks, Strips of otter Skin (which
they as well as the ricaras are excessively fond of) around their
neck falling back behind. their ears are cut at the lower part, but
fiew of them were ornements in them, their hair is generally Cut in
the forehead above their eyes and Small ornimented plats in front
of each Sholder the remainder of the hair is either twisted in with
horse or buffalow hair divided into two plats over the Sholder or
what is most common flow's back, Their women are homely, corse feetured
wide mouthes they ware Simpially a leathe habit made in a plain form
of two pieces of equal length and equal weadth, which is sewen together
with Sinues from the tail to about half way from the hip to the arm,
a String fastens the 2 pieces together over the Sholders leaveng a
flap or lapells which fall over near half way ther body both before
and behind. those dresses usially fall as low as mid leg, they are
frequently ornemented with beeds and Shells & Elk tuskes of which
all Indians are very fond of. those dresses are als frequently Printed
in various regular figures with hot sticks which are rubed on the
leather with Such velosity as to nearly burn it this is very handsom.
they were their hair flowing and are excessively fond of ornamenting
their ears with blue beeds- this nation peacbly disposed they may
be estimated at from 350 to 400 men inhabetig from 130 to 150 Lodges,
they are rich in horses & Dogs, the dogs Carry a great preportion
of their light baggage. they Confess to be at war with no nation except
the Sieoux with whome they have ever since their remembranc been on
a difencive war, with the Bands of Sieoux. as I was about to leave
the Cheifs of the Chyennes lodge he requested me to Send Some traders
to them, that their country was full of beaver and they would then
be encouraged to Kill beaver, but now they had no use for them as
they could get nothing for their skins and did not know well, how
to catch beaver. if the white people would come amongst them they
would become acquainted and the white people would learn them how
to take the beaver-.

I promised the Nation that I would inform their Great father the President of the U States, and
he would have them Supplied with goods, and mentioned in what manner
they would be Supplied &c. &c.

I am happy to have it in my power
to Say that my worthy friend Capt Lewis is recovering fast, he walked
a little to day for the first time.

I have discontinud the tent in the hole the ball came out

I have before mentioned that the Mandans Maharhas Menetarras & Ricarras, keep their horses in
the Lodge with themselves at night.

[Clark, August 23, 1806] Saturday 23rd August 1806 We Set out very early, the wind rose & became
very hard, we passed the Sar-war-kar-na-har river at 10 A. M and at half past eleven the wind
became So high and the water So rough that we were obliged to put to Shore and Continue untill
3 p. M. when we had a Small Shower of rain after which the wind lay,
and we proceeded on.

Soon after we landed I Sent Shields & Jo. & Reubin Fields down to the next bottom of timber to
hunt untill our arival. we proceeded on Slowly and landed in the bottom. the hunters had killed three
Elk and 3 Deer the deer were pore and Elk not fat had them fleece & brought in. the Musqueters
large and very troublesom. at 4 P. M a Cloud from the N W with a violent rain for about half
an hour after the rain we again proceeded on. I observe great quantities of Grapes and Choke
Cheries, also a Speces of Currunt which I had never before observed
the leas is larger than those above, the Currt. black and very inferior
to either the yellow, red, or perple- at dark we landed on a Small
Sand bar under a Bluff on the S W. Side and encamped, this Situation
was one which I had Chosen to avoid the Musquetors, they were not
very troublesom after we landed. we Came only 40 Miles to daye

My
Frend Capt Lewis is recoverig fast the hole in his thy where the Ball
passed out is Closed and appears to be nearly well. the one where
the ball entered discharges very well-.

[Clark, August 24, 1806] Sunday 24th August 1806 a fair morning we
Set out as usial about Sunrise and proceeded on untill 2 P M when
the wind blew So hard from the N. W. that we could not proceed came
too on the S W. Side where we continued untill 5 P.M. when the wind
lay a little and we again proceeded on. at 8 a M. we passed La-hoo-catts
Island, opposit the lower point of this Island on the S. W. Side near
the top of the Bluff I observed a Stratea of White stone I landed
and examined it found it to be a Soft White Stone containing very
fine grit, when expd. to the Sun and become Dry this Stone will Crumble
the Clay of this bluff to the above and below is remarkably Black.
at half past 9 a.m. passed Good hope Island and at 11 a. m passed
Caution Island a Short distance below this Island we came too.

Sent out a hunter he Saw Several deer they were very wild and he returned without haveing killed any,
the deer on this pt. of the Missouri is mostly the Mule or black tail Species. we Saw only 6 buffalow
to day the Sieoux have been laterly encamped on the river and have Secured the most of the
game opp. a large trail has passed on a derection to the enterance of the Chyenne this probably
is the trail of a war party. at 5 P.M. we proceeded on a fiew miles and Encampd. on the gouge
of the lookout bend of 20 miles around and 3/4 through, a little
above an old tradeing house and 4 miles above of our outward bound
encampment of the 1st of October 1804, haveing made 43 miles to day.

[Clark, August 25, 1806] Monday 25th August 1806 a cool clear morning a Stiff breeze ahead
we Set out at the usial hour and proceeded on very well.
 I am going to use everything
we have: all our cups and saucers, no matter whether they are Spode, Lowestoft, or Worcester;
all the platters, German beer mugs, candlesticks--even that rare old tablecloth trimmed with
church lace. This is an entertainment to be given by a distinguished antiquary in honor of
his lovely daughter"--and he bowed to each in turn--"the whole conducted under the management
of his junior clerk, Mr. F. O'Day, who is very much at your service, sir."

Chapter VIII

Bright and early the following morning Felix began work, and for the next two days took entire
charge of the room, walking up and down its length, an absolute dictator, brooking no interference
from any one. When Mike's frowsy head or Hans's grimy hands appeared above the level of the
landing from the floor below, steadying with their chins some new possession, it was either,
"here, in the middle of the room, men!" or, if it were big and cumbersome, "up-stairs, out
of the way!" This had gone on until the banquet hall was one conglomerate mass of mixed chattels
from the Jersey shop, Kling's old stock being stowed in some other part of the building. Then
began the picking out. First the doubtful, but rich in color, tapestries, then the rugs--some
fairly good ones--stuffs, old and new, and every available rag which would hold together were
spread over the four walls and the front windows. The heavier and more decorative pieces of
furniture came next--among them a huge wooden altar which had never been put together and which
was now backed close against the tapestries and hanging rugs in the centre of the long wall.
Two Venetian wedding-chests, low enough to sit upon, were next placed in position, and between
them three Spanish armchairs in faded velvet and one in crinkly leather, held together by big
Moorish nails of brass. Above these chests and chairs were hung gilt brackets holding church
candles, Spanish mirrors so placed that the shortest woman in the party could see her face,
and big Italian disks of dull metal. The walls were wonderful in their rich simplicity, and
so was the disposition of the furniture, Felix's skilful eye having preserved the architectural
proportions in both the selection and placing of the several articles.

More wonderful than all else, however, was the great gold throne at the end of the room, on
which Masie was to sit and receive her guests and which was none other than the big cardinal's
chair, incrusted with mouldy gilt, that had first inspired her with the idea of the party.
This was hoisted up bodily and placed on an auctioneer's platform which Mike had found tilted
back against the wall in the cellar. To hide its dirt and cracks, rugs were laid, pieced out
by a green drugget which extended half across the floor, now swept of everything except two
refreshment tables.

Next came the ceiling. What Felix did to that ceiling, or rather what that ceiling did for
Felix, and how it looked when he was through with it is to this very day a topic of discussion
among the now scattered inhabitants of "The Avenue." Masie knew, and so did deaf Auntie Gossburger,
who often spent the day with the child. She, with Masie, had been put in charge of the china
and glass department, and when the old woman had pulled up from the depths of a barrel first
one red cup without a handle and then a dozen or more, and had asked what they were for, Felix
had seized them with a cry of joy: "Oil cups! They fit on the tops of these church lamps. I
never expected to find these! Mike! Go over to Mr. Pestler's and tell him to send me a small
box of floating night-tapers--the smallest he has. Now, Tootcums, you wait and see!"

And then the step-ladder was moved up, and Mike and one of the Dutchies passed up the lamps
to Felix, who drove the hooks into the rafters--twenty-two of them--and then slid down to the
floor, taking in the general effect, only to clamber up again to lengthen this chain, or shorten
that, so that the whole ceiling, when the cups were filled and the tapers lighted, would be
a blaze of red stars hung in a firmament of dull, yellow-washed gold.

The final touch came last. This was both a surprise and a discovery. Hans had found it flattened
out on the top of a big, circular table, and was about to tear it loose when Felix, who let
nothing escape his vigilant eye, seized its metal handle, whereupon the mass sagged, tilted,
straightened, and then rounded out into a superb Chinese lantern of yellow silk, decorated
with black dragons, with only one tear in its entire circumference, and that one Auntie Gossburger
darned so skilfully that nobody noticed the hole. This, Felix, after much consideration, swung
to the rafter immediately over the throne, so that its mellow light should fall directly on
the child's face.

Kling, while these preparations were in progress, was in a state of mind bordering on the pathetic.
Felix had made him promise not to come up until the room was finished, but every few hours
his head would be thrust up over the edge of the stairs, his eyes screwed up in his fat face,
an expression of wonder, not unmixed with anxiety, flitting across his countenance. Then he
would back down-stairs, muttering to himself all the time; his chief cause of complaint being
the hiding of so many things his customers might want to buy and the displaying of so many
others at which they might only want to look!

There was, however, even after the decorations seemed complete, a bare corner to be filled
with something neither too big, nor too small, nor too insistent in color or form. Felix went
twice over the stock, old and new, twisted and turned, and was about to give up when he suddenly
called to Masie, his face lighting under the glow of a fresh inspiration:

"I have it now! Come, Tootcums, with me! Mr. Sanderson will help us out." All of which came
true; for Mr. Sanderson, ten minutes later, had bent his head close to the child's lips to
hear the better, and had said: "Only two? Why, Masie, you can have the lot." And that was how
the bare corner was filled with three great palms--the biggest he had in his shop--and the
grand salon of the Grande Duchesse Masie Beeswings de Kling at last made ready for her guests.

This done, Felix made a final inspection of the room, adding a touch here and there--shifting
a piece of pottery or redraping the frayed end of a square of tapestry--and finding that everything
kept its place in the general effect, without a single discordant note, drew Masie to a seat
beside him on one of the old Venetian chests. Here, with his arms about the enthusiastic child,
he laid bare the next and to him the most important number on the programme.

And in this he wrought another upheaval, one almost as great as had taken place in the room.
The time-honored custom of all birthday parties entailing upon the invited the giving of presents
as proof of affection, was not, he hinted gently, to be observed upon this occasion. "It is
Masie who is to give the presents," he whispered, holding her closer, "and not her guests."

The child at first had protested. The long procession of guests coming up to hand her their
gifts, and her fun next day when looking them over--knowing how queer some of them would be--had
been part of her joyful anticipation, but Felix would not yield.

"You see, Masie, darling," he coaxed, "now that you are going to be a real princess," he was
smoothing back her curls as he spoke, "you are going to be so high up in the world that nobody
will dare to give you any presents. That is the way with all princesses. Kings and queens are
never given presents on their birthdays unless their permission is asked, but, just because
they ARE kings and queens, they give presents to everybody else. And then again, Masie, dear,
if you stop to think about it, people really get a great deal more fun out of giving things
than they do of having things given to them."

She succumbed, as she always did, when her "Uncle Felix," with his voice lowered to a whisper,
his lips held close to her ear, either counselled or chided her, and a new joy thrilled through
her as he explained how his plan was to be carried out.

Kling lifted up his hands in protest when he heard of O'Day's innovation, but was overruled
and bowled over before he had framed his first sentence. It was the sentiment, Felix insisted,
which was to be considered, the good feeling behind the gift, not the cost of it. He and Masie
had worked it all out together, and please not to interfere.

But Kling did interfere, and right royally, too, when he found time to think it over. Some
one of the old German legends must have worked its way through the dull crust of his brain,
bringing back memories of his childhood. Perhaps his conscience was pricked by his clerk's
attitude. Whatever the cause, certain it is that he crept up-stairs a few hours before his
house was to be thrown open to Masie's guests, and, finding the banquet hall completely finished
and nobody about, Felix and Masie having gone out together to perfect some little detail connected
with the gifts, walked around in an aimless way, overwhelmed by the beauty and charm of the
interior as it lay before him in the afternoon light.

On his way down he met the deaf Gossburger coming up.

"Dot is awful nice!" he shouted. "I couldn't believe dot was possible! Dot is a vunderful--VUNderful
man! I don't see how dem rags and dot stuff look like dot ven you get 'em togedder anodder
vay. And now dere is vun thing I don't got in my head yet: Vot is it about dese presents?"

The old woman recounted the details as best she could.

"And dot is all, is it, Auntie Gossburger? Only of pasteboard boxes vid candies in 'em, and
little pieces paper vid writings on 'em dot Mr. O'Day makes? Is dot vot you mean?"

The old woman nodded.

Kling turned suddenly, went down-stairs with his head up and shoulders back, called Hans to
keep shop, and put on his hat.

When he returned an hour later, he was followed by a man carrying a big box. This was placed
behind Masie's throne and so concealed by a rug that even Felix missed seeing it.

That everybody had accepted--everybody who had been invited--"big, little, and middle-sized"--goes
without saying. Masie had called at each house herself, with Felix as cavalier--just as he
had promised her. And they had each and every one, immediately abandoned all other plans for
that particular night, promising to be there as early as could be arranged, it being a Saturday
and the shops on "The Avenue" open an hour later than usual--an indulgence counterbalanced
by the fact that next day was Sunday and they could all sleep as long as they pleased.

And not only the neighbors, but Nat Ganger and Sam Dogger accepted. Felix had gone down himself
with Masie's message, and they both had said they would come--Sam to be on hand half an hour
before the appointed hour of nine so as to serve as High Lord of the Robes, Masie having determined
that nobody but "dear old Mr. Dogger" should show her how to put on the costume he had given her.

As for these two castaways, when they did enter the gorgeous room on the eventful night they
fairly bubbled over.

"Don't let old Kling touch it," Ganger roared out as soon as he stepped inside, before he had
even said "How do you do?" to anybody. "Keep it as an exhibit. Better still, send circulars
up and down Fifth Avenue, and open it up as a school--not one of 'em knows how to furnish their
houses. How the devil did you--Oh, I see! Just plain yellow-wash and the reflected red light.
Looks like a stained-glass window in a measly old church. Where's Sam. Oh, behind that screen.
Well come out here and look at that ceiling!"

Sam didn't come out, and didn't intend to. He was busy with the child's curls, which were bunched
up in the fingers of one hand, while the other was pressing the wide leghorn hat into the precise
angle which would become her most, the Gossburger standing by with the rest of the costume,
Masie's face a sunburst of happiness.

"And now the long skirt, Mrs. Bombagger, or whatever your name is. That's it, over her head
first and then down along the floor so she will look as if she was grown up. And now the big
ostrich-plume fan--a little seedy, my dear, and yellow as a kite's foot, but nobody'll see
it under that big, yellow lantern. Now let me look at you! Nat, NAT! where are you, you beggar,
stop rummaging around that dead stuff and come behind here and look at this live child! yes,
right in here. Now look! Did you ever in all your born days see anything half so pretty?" the
outburst ending with, "Scat, you little devil of a dog!" when Fudge gave a howl at being stepped
upon.

Masie, as she listened, plumed her head as a pigeon would preen its feathers, stood up to see
her train sweep the floor, sat down again to watch the stained satin folds crumple themselves
about her feet, and was at last so overcome by it all that she threw her arms around Sam, to
his intense delight, and kissed him twice, and would have given Nat an equal number had not
Felix called to him that the guests were beginning to arrive.

As to these guests, you could not have gotten their names on one side of Kitty's order-book,
nor on both sides, for that matter. There was brisk, bustling Bundleton the grocer in a green
necktie, white waistcoat, and checked trousers, arm and arm with his thin wife in black silk
and mitts; there was Heffern the dairyman in funeral black, relieved by a brown tie, and his
daughter, in variegated muslin, accompanied by two young men whom neither Kling nor Felix nor
the Gossburger had ever heard of or seen before, but who were heartily welcomed; there were
fat Porterfield the butcher in his every-day clothes, minus his apron, with his two girls,
aged ten and fourteen, their hair in pigtails tied with blue ribbons; there were Mr. and Mrs.
Codman, all in their best "Sunday-go-to-meetings," with their little daughter Polly, named
after the mother, pretty as a picture and a great friend of Masie--most distinguished people
were the Codmans, he looking like an alderman and his wife the personification of good humor,
her rosy cheeks matching the tint of her husband's necktie.

There was Digwell the undertaker in his professional clothes, enlivened by a white waistcoat
and red scarf, quite beside himself with joy because nobody had died or was likely to die so
far as he had heard, thus permitting him to "send dull care to the winds!"--his own way of
putting it. There was Pestler the druggist in an up-to-date dress suit as good as anybody's--almost
as good as the one Felix wore, and from which, for the first time since he landed, he had shaken
the creases. There was Tim Kelsey, in the suit of clothes he wore every day, the only difference
being the high collar instead of the turned-down one, the change giving him the appearance
of a man with a bandaged neck, so narrow were his poor shoulders and so big was the fine head
overtopping it. There were Mike and Bobby and the two Dutchies and Sanderson, who came with
his hands full of roses for Masie, and a score of others whose names the scribe forgets, besides
lots and lots of children of all sizes and ages.

And there were Kitty and John--and they were both magnificent--at least Kitty was--she being
altogether resplendent in black alpaca finished off by a fichu of white lace, her big, full-bosomed,
robust body filling it without a crease; and he in a new suit bought for the occasion, and
which fitted him everywhere except around the waist--a defect which Kitty had made good by
means of a well-concealed safety-pin in the back.

It was for Kitty that Felix had been on the lookout ever since the guests began to arrive,
and no sooner did her rosy, beaming face appear behind that of her husband, than he pushed
his way through the throng to reach her side. "No, not out here, Mistress Kitty," he cried.
Had she been of royal blood he could not have treated her with more distinction. "You are to
stand alongside of Masie when she comes in; the child has no mother, and you must look after her."

"No mother! Mr. O'Day! God rest your soul, she won't need to do without one long, she's that
lovely. There'll be plenty will want to mother, and brother her, too, for that matter. My goodness,
what a place ye made of it! Look at them lamps, all fireworks up there, and that big chair!
I wonder who robbed a church to get it! Well--well---WELL! John! did ye ever see the like?
Otto, ye ought to rent this place out for a chowder-party ball. Well, well, I NEVER!"

The comments of some of the others, while they voiced their complete surprise, were less enthusiastic.
Bundleton, after shaking hands with Felix and Kitty, and then with Kling, dropped his wife
and made a tour of the room without uttering a sound of any kind until he reached Felix again,
when he remarked gravely: "I should think it would worry you some to keep the moths out of
this stuff," and then passed on to tell Kling he must look out "them lamps didn't spill and
set things on fire."

Porterfield, as was to be expected, was distinctly practical. "Awful lot of truck when you
get it all together, ain't it, Mr. O'Day? I was just tellin' my wife that them two chairs up
t'other side of the room wouldn't last long in my parlor, they're that wabbly. But maybe these
Fifth Avenue folks don't do no sittin'--just keep 'em in a glass case to look at."

Pestler was more discerning. He had come across an iridescent glass jar, and was edging around
for an opportunity to ask Kling the price without letting Felix overhear him--it being an occasion,
he knew, in which Mr. O'Day would feel offended if business were mentioned. "Might do to put
in my window, if it didn't cost too much," he had begun, and as suddenly stopped as he caught
Felix's eyes fastened upon him.

There were others, however, whose delight could not be repressed. Tim Kelsey, after the proper
greetings were over, had wandered off down the room, stopping to examine each article in its
place on the walls. Finally some pieces of old Delft caught his eye. He made a memorandum of
two in a little book he took from his inside pocket, and later on, when a break in the surrounding
conversation made it possible, remarked to Felix: "They seem to get everything in the new Delft
but the old delicious glaze. On a wall it doesn't matter, but you don't feel like putting real
old Delft on a wall. I like to stroke it, as I would a friend's hand."

These inspections and comments over, and that peculiar timidity which comes over certain classes
lifted out of their customary environment and doing their best to become accustomed to new
surroundings having begun to wear away under the tactful welcome of Felix, and the hour having
arrived for the grand ceremony of gift-giving, the throne was pushed back, Masie called from
behind her screen, and O'Day's wicker basket filled with the presents was laid by the side
of the big chair.

Kling and Kitty were now beckoned to and placed on the left of the throne, Felix taking up
his position on the right.

The stir on the platform caused by these arrangements soon attracted everybody's attention
and a sudden hush fell upon the room. What was about to happen nobody knew, but something important,
or Mr. O'Day would not have stepped to its edge, nor would Otto have been so red in the face,
nor Kitty so radiant.

Felix raised his hand to command supreme silence.

"Masie wishes me," he began in his low, even voice, "to tell you that she has done her best
to remember every one, and that she hopes nobody has been forgotten. These little trifles she
is about to give you are not gifts, but just little mementos to express her thanks for your
kindness in coming to her first party. She bids me tell you, too, that her love goes out to
every one of you on this the happiest night of her life and that she welcomes you all with
her whole heart."

He turned, stepped back a pace, made the radiant child a low bow, held out his hand, and led
her into full view of the audience, the rays of the big lantern softening the tones of the
quaint, picturesque costume which concealed her slight figure, transforming the child of eleven
into the woman of eighteen.

For at least ten seconds, and that is a long period of time when your heart is in your mouth
and you are ready to explode with uncontrollable delight, not a sound of any kind broke the
silence, no handclap of welcome, no murmur of applause; just plain, simple astonishment, the
kind that takes your breath away. That Kling's little girl stood before them, nobody believed.
O'Day had fooled them with this new vision, just as he had bewitched them by the glamour of
the decorated room. Only when a few simple words of welcome fell from her lips were the flood-gates
opened. Then a shout went up which set the candles winking--a shout only surpassed in volume
and good cheer when Felix began handing up the little packages from Masie's basket. And dainty
little packages they were, filled with all sorts of inexpensive souvenirs that she and Felix
(not much money between the two of them) had picked up at Baxter's Toy Shop on Third Avenue,
all suggested by some peculiarity of the recipient, all kindly and good-natured, and each one
enlivened by a quotation or some original line in Felix's own handwriting.

During the whole delightful ceremony Otto had stood on the left of his daughter, his heart
thumping away, his face growing redder every minute, his eyes intent on each guest elbowing
a way through the crowd as Masie handed them their gifts, noting the general happiness and
the laughter that followed the reading of the lines, wondering all the time why no one was
offended at the size and, to him, worthlessness of the several offerings.

When it was all over and the basket empty, he jumped down from the platform, his fat back bent
in excitement, tossed aside the rug, lifted the big box, placed it beside the gilt throne,
and raised his puffy hands to command attention: "Now listen, everybody! I got someting to
say. Beesvings don't have all dis to herselluf. Now it is my turn. Come up closer so I get
hold of you. Vait, and I git back on de platform. Here, you olt frent of mine, Dan Porterfield,
here is a new butcher-knife sharpener for you, to sharpen your knives on ven you cuts dem bifsteaks.
And, Heffern, come close; here is a silver-plated skimmer for dot cream you make, and a pig
fan for your daughter. And Polly Codman--git out of de way dere, and let Polly Codman come
up!--here, Polly, is a pair of gloves for you and a muffler for Codman, and here is more gloves
and neckties and--I got a lot more; I didn't got much time and I bought dem all in a hurry--and
dey are all from me and Masie and don't you forgit dot. I ain't never been so happy as I am
to-night, and you vas awful good to come and see my little girl dot don't got no mudder. And
you must all tank Mr. O'Day for de great help he vas. Now dot's all I got to say."

He drew his hand across his eyes, made an awkward bow, and sat down. Everybody gasped in amazement.
Many of them had known him for years, ever since he moved into "The Avenue"--twenty years,
at least--but nobody had ever seen him as he was to-night. That he had in his intended generosity
overlooked half of his friends made no difference. Those who received something showed it for
weeks afterward to everybody who came. Those who had nothing forgave him in their delight over
the good-will he had shown to the others. Even Felix, who had been watching him soften and
thaw out under the warmth of the child's happiness, and who thought he knew the man and his
nature, was astounded, and showed it by grasping for the first time his employer's hand, looking
him in the eyes as he said, "I owe you an apology, sir," a proceeding Otto often pondered over,
its meaning wholly escaping him.

But the great surprise of the evening, in which even Felix had had no share, was yet to come.
He had carried out his promise to provide the simple refreshments, and a table had been set
apart for their serving. The sandwiches made at the bakeshop a block below had already arrived
and been put in place, and he was about to announce supper, when he became aware that a mysterious
conference was being held near the top of the stairs, in which Kitty, Polly Codman, and Heffern's
daughter Mary, were taking part. He had already noticed, with some discomfiture, the absence
of a number of male guests, half of them having left the room without presenting themselves
before Masie to bid her good night, and was about to ask Kitty for an explanation, when a series
of thumping sounds reached his ear; something heavy was being rolled along the floor beneath
his feet. As the noise increased, Kitty and her beaming coconspirators craned their necks over
the banisters and a welcoming roar went up. Bundleton's head now came into view, a wreath of
smilax wound loosely around his neck, followed by one of his men carrying a keg of beer; another
shouldering a sawhorse, a wooden mallet, and a wooden spigot; and still a third with a basket
of stone mugs.

"Come, folks and neighbors, everybody have a glass of beer with me!" shouted Bundleton.

Up went the sawhorse before you would wink your eye! Down went the keg across its arms, the
smilax around it! Bang went the bung! In went the wooden spigot! And out flew the white froth!

Another roar now went up, accompanied by great clapping of hands. It was Codman's head this
time, a cook's cap resting on his ears, his hands bearing a great dish athwart which lay a
cold salmon that the baker had cooked for him that morning. Close behind came Pestler with
a tray filled with boxes of candy, and next Sanderson with a flattish basket piled high with
carnations, each one tied as a boutonniere; and Porterfield with a bunch of bananas; and so
on and so on--each arrival being received with fresh roars and shouts of welcoming approval.
Last of all came Kitty, her face one great, pervading, all-embracing laugh, her own big coffee-pot
filled to the brim and smoking hot on a waiter, her boy Bobby following, loaded down with cups
and saucers.

Supper over--and it was a mighty feast, with everybody waiting on everybody else, Kitty busiest
of all, filling each cup herself--Digwell the undertaker, who had really been the life of the
party, remarked in a voice loud enough to be heard half-way across the room that it was a pity
there was no piano, as a party could not be a real party without a dance. At this Kling, who
was having a mug with Codman, rose from his seat, stepped to the top of the stairs and, looking
over the crowd, called for four strong men, "right avay, k'vick!" Codman, Pestler, Mike, and
Digwell responded, and before anybody knew where they had gone, or what it was all about, up
came an old-fashioned spinet, which Kling remembered had been hidden behind a Martha Washington
bedstead on the floor below.

"All together, men!" shouted Codman, and it was picked up bodily, whirled into position, dusted
off in a jiffy, and ready for use.

At this Pestler sprang to his feet, shouted he was coming back in a minute, rushed to the stairway,
went down three steps at a time, bolted through the front door, across the street, up into
his bedroom, and back again, all in one breath, waving his violin triumphantly over his head
as he entered.

And then it was that the real fun began. And then it was that virtue had its own reward, for
not a living soul in the room could play a note on the spinet except the tallest and spookiest
and, to all appearances, the stupidest of the two young men, whom the Heffern girl had brought
and who turned out to have once been the star pianist in some dance-hall on the Bowery. And
the scribe remarks, parenthetically and in all seriousness, that the way that lank, pin-headed
young man revived the soul of that old, worn-out harpischord, digging into its ribs, kicking
at its knees with both feet, hand-massaging every one of the keys up, down, and crossways,
until the ancient fossil fairly rattled itself loose with the joy of being alive once more,
was altogether the most astounding miracle he has ever had to record. And Pestler with his
violin was not far behind.

Everything had now broken loose.

At the first note, up jumped Kitty, caught John around the neck, and went whirling around the
room. At the second note, up jumped Codman, made a dive for Polly, missed her in the mix-up
and, grabbing Mrs. Digwell instead, went sailing down the room as if he had done nothing else
all his life. At the third note, away went Sanderson and Bundleton, Heffern, everybody but
the two castaways and Tim Kelsey, who beat juba on their knees, old Sam Dogger playing a tattoo
all by himself with two knife-handles and a plate. Some danced with their own wives; some with
anybody's wife or daughter or child--a grand hullabaloo, down the middle, across, back, and
up again, until everybody was exhausted and fell in a heap into Felix's Spanish chairs, or
on his Venetian wedding-chests, or wherever else they could find resting-places in which to
catch their breaths.

And now comes the crowning touch of all--the last of the evening's surprises, and one remembered
the longest because of its simplicity and its beauty!

When everybody was resting, out stepped Felix, the light of the overhead candles falling on
his pale, thoughtful face, white shirt-front, and faultless suit of black which fitted his
well-knit, handsome frame like a glove, and with him the Grande Duchesse Masie de Kling, the
child bowing and smiling as she passed, the wide leghorn hat shading her face from the light
of the lanterns above, her long train caught, woman-fashion, over her arm. Then, with a low
word to the pin-headed young man, followed by a downward wave of his palm to denote the time,
and the child's fingers firm in his own, Felix led her through an old-fashioned, stately minuet,
telling her in an undertone just what steps to take.

It was Sunday morning before the merry party broke up and streamed out through Kling's lower
shop, and so on into the street. Everybody had had the time of their lives. Such remarks as
"Would ye have believed it of Otto?" or, "Wasn't Masie the sweetest thing ye ever saw?" or,
"Just think of Mr. O'Day fixing up that old junk room the way he did--ye can't beat him nowheres!"
or, "Oh, I tell ye, Otto struck it rich when he took him on!", were heard on all sides.

So loud were the laughter and chatter, the good nights and good-bys, that big Tom McGinniss
moved over from the opposite curb.

"Halloo, John!" cried the policeman. "I thought I couldn't be mistaken. And Kitty, that you
with your coffee-pot? I just come up from Lexington Avenue and heard the row, wondering what
was up. Is it up-stairs ye were? WHAT! Dutchy givin' a ball? Oh, ye can't mean it! No, thank
ye, Kitty, it will be too late for ye all--I'll drop in to-morrow night. Well, take care of
yourselves," and he disappeared in the darkness.

Felix watched the throng disperse, bade Kitty and John good night, and, turning sharply, directed
his steps toward Madison Square. Here he sank upon a bench, away from the glare of an overhead
lamp. For some minutes he sat without moving, his mind wholly absorbed with the events of the
preceding hours. The roar and crush of the room came back to him. He caught again the light
in Masie's eyes as she followed his lead in the dance and the mob of happy faces crowding to
her side, and then with a shudder he confronted the gaunt sorrow that had hourly dogged his
steps. An overpowering sense of depression now took possession of him. Pushing back his hat
as if to give himself more air, he was about to resume his walk when he became conscious that
something had stirred at the far end of the seat.

Straightening his broad shoulders, his quick, alert manner returning, he moved nearer, his
eyes searching the gloom. A newsboy, a little chap of seven or eight, his papers under him,
lay fast asleep.

For an instant he watched the rise and fall of the boy's breath, adjusted the short, patched
coat about the little fellow's knees, and then slid back to his end of the bench.

"Same old grind," he said to himself, "no home--no money--cold--maybe hungry. Never too young
to suffer--never too old to eat your heart out. What a damnable world it is!"

Rising to his feet, he felt in his pocket for a coin, widened the pocket of the waif's jacket,
and slipped it in. The boy stirred, tightened his grasp on his papers, and lay still.

Felix looked down at him for a moment, turned, and with lightened steps continued his walk.

"Well, thank God," he said as he neared "The Avenue," "Masie was happy one night in her life."

Chapter IX

That the memories of Masie's birthday party should have been revived again and again, and that
the several incidents should have been discussed for days thereafter--every eye growing the
brighter in the telling--was to have been expected. Kitty could talk of nothing else. The beauty
of the room; the charm of Masie's costume; Kling's generosity; and last, O'Day's bearing and
appearance as he led the child through the stately dance, looking, as Kitty expressed it, "that
fine and handsome you would have thought he was a lord mayor," were now her daily topics of
conversation.

Masie was equally enthusiastic, rushing down-stairs the next morning to throw her arms around
his neck with an "Oh, Uncle Felix, I never, NEVER, NEVER was so happy in all my life!"

Kling was still more jubilant. The success of Masie's banquet room had established him at once
among bric-a-brac dealers as a competitor quite out of the ordinary. His old customers came
in flocks, walking about with gasps of astonishment. Before the week was out, a masonic lodge
had bought the throne, a seaside resort the big Chinese lantern, and two of the four Spanish
chairs had found a home in a millionaire's library.

Moreover--and this was all the more remarkable in view of his early training--a certain deference
became apparent in the Dutchman's manner not only toward Felix but toward his customers. He
no longer received them in his shirt-sleeves. He bought some new clothes and sported a collar,
necktie, and hat, duplicating those worn by Felix as near as his memory served.

Still more remarkable were the changes wrought among the neighbors in their attitude toward
O'Day. Until then they had, in their independent fashion, treated him like any of the other
men who came in and out their several stores, pleased with his interest in the business, but
quickly forgetting him as they became reabsorbed in the affairs of the day. Now, as they told
him what a good time they had had on the birthday, they raised their hats. Porterfield went
so far as to tell the radiant Kitty that her boarder was a "Jim Dandy," and that if she should
lay her hands on another to "trot him out."

Kitty of course had expected these triumphs, but that it was she who had made them possible,
and that but for her own individual efforts Felix might still be wandering around the streets
in search of bed and board, apparently never crossed her mind. He would have been just as splendid,
she said to herself, and just as much of a man no matter who had helped and no matter where
his feet had landed.

If O'Day were aware of the changes of public opinion going on around him, there was nothing
in either his manner or in his speech to show it. When they complimented him on the way in
which he had utilized Otto's old stock, producing so wonderful an interior, he would remark
quietly that it was nothing to his credit. He had always loved such things; that it came natural
to some people to put things to rights, and that any one could have done as much. It was only
when some one alluded to Masie that his face would light up. "Yes, charming, was she not? Such
a wonderful little lady, and so good!"

That which did please him--please him immensely--was the outcome of a visit made some days
after the party by old Nat Ganger.

"Regular Aladdin lamp," Nat shouted, slamming Kling's door behind him. "One rub, bang goes
the rubbish, and up comes an Oriental palace. Another rub and little devils swarm over the
walls and ceilings and begin hanging up stuffs and lamps. Another rub, and before you can wink
your eye, out steps a little princess, a million times prettier than any Cinderella that ever
lived. Wonderful! WONDERFUL!

"Where is the darling child anyway. Can't I see her? I got away from Sam, telling him I was
going to look up another frame for one of my pictures. Here it is. All a lie, every bit of
it. It's Sam's picture. Not mine. I wrapped it up so he wouldn't know, but I came to see that
darling child all the same, for I've got a surprise for her. But first I want you to see this
picture. Here, wait until I untie this string. It's one of Sam's Hudson Rivery things. Palisades
and a steamboat in the foreground, and an afternoon sky. Easy dodge, don't you see? Yellow
sky and purple hill, and short streak for the steamboat and its wake, and a smear of white
steam straggling behind. Sam does 'em as well as anybody. Sometimes he puts in a pile or two
in the foreground for a broken dock and a rowboat with a lone fisherman squatting on the hind
seat. Then he asks five dollars more. Always get more you know for figures in a landscape."

He had unwrapped the canvas by this time, and was holding it to the light of the window that
Felix might see it better.

Felix studied it carefully, even to the cramped signature in the corner, "Samuel Dogger, A.
N. A."; and with an appreciative smile said: "Very good, I should say. Yes, very good."

"Good! It's really very bad, and you know it. So do I. But you're too much of a gentleman to
say so. Can't be worse, really, but 'puttying up' is down by the heels, and there hasn't been
an old master from Flushing, Long Island, or Weehawken, New Jersey, lugged up our stairs for
a month;--two months, really. We had one last week from a dealer down-town which turned out
to be genuine after Sam had looked it over. And, of course, Sam wouldn't touch it and sent
for the auctioneer and told him so. And the beggar made Sam hunt for the signature and Sam
found it at the top of the canvas instead of at the bottom. One of the early Dutchmen Sam said
it was. Some kind of a Beck or a Koven. And would you believe it, the very next day the fellow
got a whacking price for it from a collector up in one of the side streets near the Park. So
Sam has gone back to the early American school. This means that he's getting down to his last
five-dollar bill, and I want to tell you that I'm not far from it myself. I'd have been dead
broke if I hadn't sold two Fatimas. One in pink pants and the other a flying angel in summer
clothes to fit an alcove in an up-town barroom over the cigar-stand.

"But my money isn't Sam's money," he went on without pausing, "and Sam won't touch a penny
of it. Never does unless I fool him on the sly. And I've come up here to fool him now, and
fool him bad. I want you to hold on to this bust--wait until I get it out of my pocket." Here
he pulled out a small bronze, a head of Augustus, beautifully wrought.

"If you buy the picture, I'll throw in the ancient Roman," and he laid it on the counter.

"And I want you to write Sam a note, asking him if he can't look around for one of his masterpieces,
something say ten by fourteen; wanted for a customer who only buys good things. That any little
landscape with water in it will do. Remember, don't leave out the water. Then Sam will come
thumping down-stairs with the note, and I'll be awfully astonished and we'll talk it over,
and I'll pull this out from under a pile of stuff where I'll hide it as soon as I get home.
Then I'll say: 'Well, I'm going up-town and have Mr. O'Day look at it, and maybe it will suit
him, and that if it does, I'll make him pay fifty dollars for it.' How do you think that will
work?"

Felix, who had been looking into the old fellow's eyes, reading his mind in their depths, seeing
clear down into the heart beneath, now picked up the bronze and began passing his hand over it.

"Very lovely," he said at last, "and a marvellous paten. Where did you get it?"

"Spoken like a gentleman and a man of honor, and this time you tell the truth. It's just what
you say--marvellous. I swapped a twenty by thirty for it. Will you take it?"

Felix shook his head, a smile playing about his lips.

"I would if I wanted to be unfair. Here, take your bronze and leave the picture. I will find
a frame for it, and have one of the men give it a coat of varnish."

"And you'll write the note?"

"Is that necessary?"

"Of COURSE, it's necessary. You don't know Sam. He's as cunning as a weasel and can get away
before you know it. Got to fool him. I always do. Told him more lies in one minute this morning
than a horse can trot. Will you write the note?"

Felix laughed. "Yes, just as soon as you go."

"And you won't hold on to the bronze?"

"No, I won't hold on to the bronze."

"And you can get fifty dollars for this unexampled work of art? That, of course, is the ASKING
price. Ten would do a whole lot of good."

"I cannot say positively, but I will try."

"All right. And now where's that darling child?"

A laugh rang out from the top of the stairs, the laugh of a child overjoyed at meeting some
one she loves, followed by "do you mean me?"

"Of course, I mean you, Toddlekins. Come down here and let me give you a big hug. And I've
got a message for you from that dried-up old fellow with the shaggy head. He sent you his love--every
bit of it, he said. And he's found some more gewgaws he's going to bring up some day. Told
me that, too."

Masie had reached the floor and was running toward him with her hands extended, Fudge springing
in front.

The old painter caught her up in his arms, lifting her off her little feet, and as quickly
setting her down, his eyes snapping, his whole face aglow. The joy bottled up in the child
seemed to have swept through him like an electric current.

"And wasn't it a beautiful party?" she burst out when she found her breath. "And wasn't Uncle
Felix good to make it all for me?" She had moved to O'Day's side and had slipped her hand in his.

"Yes, of course, it was," roared Ganger. "Why, old Sam Dogger was so excited when he went to
bed, he didn't sleep a wink all night. He's thought of nothing else but parties ever since.
He's getting up one for you. Told me so this morning."

The child's eyes dilated.

"What sort of a party?"

"Oh, a dandy party, but it's not going to be at night. It's going to be in the daytime. All
out in the blessed sunshine and under the trees. And everybody is going to be invited--everybody
who belongs."

The child's brow clouded. "Everybody who belongs? Why, can't Uncle Felix come?"

"Certainly, he can come. He 'belongs.'"

"And--Fudge?"

"What, that little devil of a dog? Yes, he can come, if he promises to behave himself," and
he shook his head at the culprit. "And all the chippies can come. Lots of 'em, and perhaps
a couple of robins, if they haven't gone away south. And there's a big Newfoundland dog, or
was before he was stolen, that could have swallowed this gentleman down at one gulp, but he
won't now. HE 'belonged' and always has. And, of course, you 'belong' and so does Sam and so
do I. We go out every other week and sit under these very same trees. Sam paints the branches
wiggling down in the water, and I do leaky boats. When I get the picture home, I put Jane Hoggson
fishin' in the stern."

Masie rolled her eyes.

"And you don't take her with you?"

"No."

"Why?"

"'Cause she don't 'belong.' Great difference whether you belong or not. Jane Hoggson couldn't
'belong' if she was to be born all over again."

O'Day now joined in. He had been watching Masie, noting the lights and shadows which swept
over her face as the old painter chattered away. He always welcomed any plan for giving her
pleasure, and was blessing Ganger in his heart for providing the diversion.

"And where is all this to take place, Mr. Ganger?" Felix asked at last.

"Up on the Bronx. A place you know nothing of and wouldn't believe a word about if I should
tell you--not 'til you see it yourself. It's as full of birds and butterflies as England along
the Thames, or one of those ducky little streams out of Paris. And it only costs five cents
to get there and five cents to get back. And you won't be more than a few hours away from your
shop. Fine, I tell you, you'll never forget it."

Again Felix broke in.

"I have not a doubt of it, but when is all this to take place?"

Ganger gave a little start and grew suddenly grave.

"Well, as to that, you see the day is not yet fixed, not precisely. In a week maybe, or it
may be two weeks. This is Sam's party, you know, and he hasn't completed all his arrangements--that
is, he hadn't completed them when I left him this morning. And, of course, a lot has to be
done to make everything ready"--here he nodded at Masie--"for little princesses and great ladies
in plumes and satins. But it is certainly coming off. Old Sam told me so, and he means every
word of it. And he was to let you know when. That's it, he was to LET YOU KNOW. That's another
thing he told me to tell you."

The child's name was now called from the top of the stairs, and the Gossburger's head craned
itself over the hand-rail. Fudge opened with a sharp bark, and Masie, with an air kiss to Ganger,
raced up the steps, the dog at her heels, shouting as she ran: "Tell Mr. Dogger I send him
a kiss, and I thank him ever so much, and won't he please come and see me very soon."

When she had disappeared, the old fellow leaned forward, gazed knowingly at Felix, and in soft-pedal
tones said:

"You see, Sam couldn't say EXACTLY when the party was to take place because--well, because
he hasn't heard a word about it, and won't until I get back. It is my party, not Sam's, and
I've got to break it to him gently. And I've got to fool him about the party, make him think
it's his party, or he'll think I'm holding it over him because I've got a little more money
than he has, just as I intend to fool him about the picture. I couldn't say, when you asked
me, when the day was to be fixed, because I've told lies enough to that dear child. But I know
just what Sam will do when I tell him about his party; he'll stand on his head he'll be so
happy. You see if, when I unwrapped the picture, you had talked ten dollars right out, why
then I was going to make it next Saturday; that is, to-morrow. But you hemmed and hawed so,
I had to make it 'some day soon.' Of course, I never expected the fifty; ten will be enough
for car-fare all around and some beer and sandwiches, that's all we ever have. That's why I
chucked in Augustus to make sure. Well, see what you can do, and don't forget to write the
note and I'll do the rest of the lying." And chuckling to himself he hurried away.

As the door swung wide, a slim man bustled past him, and, spying Felix, moved briskly to where
he stood. He had just ten minutes to spare, he announced, and was looking for a present for
his wife; "something in the way of fans, old ones, and not over five dollars."

Felix, who had raised the lid of the case and was stowing Dogger's masterpiece inside to keep
it out of harm's way, his mind wholly occupied with the two old painters and their tenderness
toward each other, roused himself to answer:

"Yes, half a dozen. Not at your price, though, not old ones. Here are two fairly good specimens,"
and he handed them out and laid them on the glass before him.

The man leaned forward and peered into the case.

"That's a picture of the Palisades, isn't it?" He had ignored the fans.

"Yes, so I understand."

"Oh, I knew it first time I put my eyes on it. I'm in the real-estate business. I've got a
lot of cottage sites along that top edge. Is it for sale?"

"It will be when it's cleaned and varnished and I have it framed."

"Belong to you?"

"No; it belongs to a man who has left it for sale. He went out as you came in."

"What does he want for it?"

"He would be satisfied with ten dollars, even less, because he needs the money. I want fifty."

"You want to make the rest?"

"No, it all goes to him."

"Well, what do you stick it on for?"

"Because if it isn't worth that, it isn't worth anything."

"Take it out and let me have a look at it. Yes, just the spot. That whitish streak and that
little puff of steam is where they're breaking stone. Make a good advertisement, wouldn't it,
hanging up in your office? You can show the owners just where the land lies, and you can show
a customer just what he's going to own."

A brisk bargaining then followed, he determined to buy, and Felix to maintain his price. Before
the ten minutes were out, the bustling man had forgotten all about the fan he was in search
of for his wife and, having assured himself that it was all oil-paint, every square inch of
it, had propped it up against an ancient clock, standing back to see the effect, had haggled
on five, then ten, then twenty-five, and had finally surrendered by laying five ten-dollar
bills on the glass case. After which he tucked the picture under his arm, and without a word
of any kind disappeared through the street-door.

And that is why the note which Felix had promised to write Dogger was sent by messenger instead
of by mail within five minutes after the picture and the buyer had disappeared. And that is
why, too, all the preliminary subterfuges were omitted, and the substitute contained the announcement
which follows:

"Dear Mr. Dogger:

"I have just sold your Palisade picture for fifty dollars. The amount is at your service whenever
you call.

"Yours truly,

               "Felix O'Day."

That, too, is why Dogger was so overjoyed that he beat the messenger back to Kling's, skipping
over the flag-stones most of the way till he reached the Dutchman's door, where, as befitted
a painter whose genius had at last been recognized, he slowed down, entering the store with
a steady gait, a little restrained in his manner, saying, as he tried to cram down his joy,
that it was a mere sketch, you know, something that he had knocked off out-of-doors; that Nat
had liked it and had, so he said, taken it up to have it framed. That, of course, he could
not afford ever to repeat the sale price--not for a ten by fourteen of that quality, but that
most of his rich patrons were still out of town, and so it came in very well.

And, oh, yes, he had almost forgotten! He and Nat were going up to Laguerre's, on the Bronx,
to an old French cafe, where they often lunched and painted; that Nat had suggested just as
he left the studio that it would be a good thing if Felix and that dear child Masie would go
with them, and that they would go Saturday, which was to-morrow, if that would suit O'Day and
Masie. And if that wouldn't suit, why then they'd go the very first day that did, say Sunday
or Monday, the sooner the better.

To all of which Felix, reading every thought that lurked behind the moist eyes of the tender-hearted
old fraud, had replied that, if he had the choosing, to-morrow, of all the days in the year,
would be the very day he would select, and that he and Masie would be ready any hour that he
and Mr. Ganger would be good enough to call for them.

At which the old painter took himself off in high glee.

And an altogether delightful and a very happy party it was. For a long time, the Indians were
close at his heels. Once they were so near that he heard a tomahawk as it came fluttering through
the air past his head. Then the sounds of pursuit grew less, and at last he found himself
alone on a hill. Three Indians were following on his trail, and he concealed himself behind a
tree until they were within range of his rifle, and then fired.

One of them fell, and his companions ran away.

Fernando continued his flight until nearly night, when he fell in with four Kentuckians, who
had escaped the massacre, and they proceeded to the Maumee Rapids, where General Harrison was
building Fort Meigs.

Fernando was in the fort when it was besieged several weeks later by Proctor and Tecumseh with
fully two thousand men. General Clay coming to his assistance on the 5th of May, Proctor retreated.

Colonel
Dudley made a sortie from Fort Meigs on the same day and was drawn
into an ambuscade.

He was mortally wounded and lost six hundred and fifty men.

Mr. Madison, who had been re-elected president of the United States, showed a disposition to prosecute
the war with great vigor.

While the success of the Americans on land was not very encouraging, to the surprise of everybody,
their greatest achievements were on water. England's boasted navies seemed to have become second
to the American war-vessels. On Lake Erie, Commodore Oliver Perry, in command of an inferior
fleet, had won a signal victory over Commodore Barclay after a long
and hotly contested battle.

There has never been such a remarkable naval victory on fresh water.

Perry's famous dispatch to General Harrison, "We have met the enemy and they are ours," has
become a proverb.

Shortly after the repulse of Proctor, Fernando, who had taken a place in another company, was
sent to Fort Stephenson, then commanded by Major George Croghan, a regular army officer only
twenty-one years of age.

Proctor's dusky allies marched across the country to assist the British in the siege of the
fort; and when, on the afternoon of the 31st, the British transports and gunboats appeared at
a turn in the river a mile from the fort, the woods were swarming with Indians.

Within the fort, all were calm, pale, yet determined.

Only one hundred and sixty men were there to oppose the hosts of Proctor and Tecumseh. Proctor sent
a demand to the fort for surrender, accompanied by the usual threat of massacre by the Indians
in case of refusal. To his surprise, Major Croghan sent a defiant refusal. A cannonade from the
gunboats and howitzers which the British had landed commenced.

All night long the great guns played upon the fort without any serious effect, occasionally
answered by the solitary six-pound cannon of the garrison, which was rapidly shifted from one
block house to another, to give the impression that the fort was armed with several guns.
During the night, the British dragged three six-pound cannon to a
point higher than the fort to open on it in the morning.

It was a trying night for Fernando. All night long, the incessant thunder of cannon shook the air,
and the great balls, striking the sides of the earthworks, or bursting over their heads, presented
a scene grand but awful.

Morning came slowly and wearily to the besieged.

As the gray dawn melted into the rosy hues of sunrise, many a brave man within that fort looked
up for the last time, as he thought, but still with no unmanly fear, only with that sad feeling
which the boldest will experience when he sees himself about to be
immolated.

Such a feeling, perhaps, crossed the heart of Leonidas, when he fastened on his buckler and waited
for the Persian thousands. Fernando stood near Croghan, who was in front of his men, calm in that
hour of extreme peril.

It soon became apparent that the enemy did not intend an immediate assault, for, with the battery
of six pieces, they began a fearful cannonade.

"Lie under the breastworks," said Croghan to his men as the balls were hurled about the fort,
or bounded from the ramparts. The surface of the ground in the line of fire, soon became covered
with smoke, which every few moments was rent by a whistling ball.

All that long forenoon Fernando Stevens remained behind the works occasionally picking off a
gunner at long range. When the hot August sun began to decline in the West, the roar of artillery
seemed to increase rather than diminish. At last he heard the young commander say:

"They are concentrating on the northwest corner of the fort; that is the point from which the
attack will be made." He called to Fernando and a dozen other sharpshooters and hastened to
the threatened spot. Every man who could be spared from other quarters was put in requisition, and every
bag of sand and flour that could be found was hurriedly collected and sent to strengthen the
angle.

"Lieutenant Stevens," said Major Croghan, "get your riflemen together and pick off those fellows
as fast as you can. Never mind those bags of sand. Others will attend to them."

Fernando and his score of sharpshooters soon began dropping the redcoats
as fast as they could see them.

The solitary cannon, the only hope of the defenders, was loaded to
its fullest capacity and trained so as to enfilade the enemy.

The gunner who rammed home the charge said:

"By thunder, she's almost full to the muzzle.

Shouldn't wonder if she'd bust." Each soldier took his position. A tremendous volley of cannon
shots suddenly rained on the fort.

It seemed as if the British had fired every gun at the same instant. A profound silence succeeded
within, which lasted for perhaps two minutes, at the end of which
time the enemy was seen to advance through the smoke, in one compact
column, with the steady tread of assured victors.

When Croghan gave the order to fire, such a withering volley was poured in by the garrison,
that the British reeled and fell into disorder. Whatever others may have done in that fire, Fernando's
sharpshooters wasted no bullets.

For a moment, the Britons wavered and were about to fly, when Lieutenant-Colonel
Short, who led the British in assault, sprang to the front of his
soldiers and, waving his sword above his head, cried:

"Cut away the
pickets, my brave boys, and show the d--d Yankees no quarter!"

A wild, angry shout answered this appeal, and the ranks recovering their order, the head of the
column rushed forward, and leaped down into the ditch, which was
soon densely crowded.

This was the time for which Croghan had waited. Another minute and the fort would have been
captured. The over-loaded six-pounder, so trained as to rake the assailants, now bore fully
on the masses of soldiery in the ditch.

The dark mask which had concealed it was suddenly jerked aside, and
Croghan cried:

"Fire!"

The match was applied. A clap of thunder, a sheet of flame, a hissing sound of grape, shrieks
and groans, and Fernando saw whole ranks mowed down, as the white
smoke arose for a moment hiding the prospect from view.

When the veil of battle blew aside, he saw such a scene of horror as he had never before witnessed.
At first a lane was perceptible extending through the densest portion of the assaulting mass,
marking the path traversed by the shot; but as the distance from the gun increased, and the grape
scattered, this clearly defined line gave place to a prospect of
the wildest confusion.

One third of those who had entered the ditch lay there a shapeless, quivering mass. In many instances,
the dead had fallen on the wounded, and as the latter struggled to extricate themselves, the
scene resembled that depicted in old paintings of the final judgment,
where fiends and men wrestle in horrible contortions.

Groans, shrieks and curses more terrible than all rose from that Golgotha. Lieutenant-Colonel
Short was among the slain. The few who retained life and strength, after the first second
of amazement, rushed from the post of peril, leaped wildly upon the
bank, and, communicating their terror to the rest of the column, the
whole took flight and buried itself in the neighboring woods; while
such a shout went up to heaven from the conquerors as had never been
heard on that wild shore before.

Well might the Americans exult, for the successful resistance was
against ten times their own number.

The British loss was one hundred and fifty. That hot day, August 2, 1813, at five o'clock in
the evening, George Croghan by one cannon-shot immortalized himself.

Fernando Stevens had been under a terrible strain all the day and
the night before, and no sooner was the enemy gone, than he sank exhausted
on the ground with scores of others.

CHAPTER XV.

ON LAND.

Shortly after the gallant and successful defence of Fort Stephenson, Fernando, with a detached
squad of twenty riflemen, joined General Harrison, and was subsequently
assigned to the regiment of Colonel Richard M. Johnson, whose Kentuckians
won the battle of the Thames.

From a distant shore, Tecumseh witnessed Perry's wonderful naval battle;
but of course could not determine which had been victorious.

This base falsehood did not deceive the wily Indian.

The sagacious eye of Tecumseh soon perceived indications of a retreat.

Unless the unscrupulous Proctor was utterly lost to shame, his cheek
must have burned as he listened to the stinging reproof of the noble
Indian Chief.

Ever since the white men began their political struggles for power on the American continent,
the unfortunate Indian has been their tool, and their scapegoat. Cheated, deceived by falsehoods
and false friends, he was ever thrust forward as a sacrifice to the hatred of contending white
men.

Spanish, English and French were all alike equally guilty.

Proctor and Tecumseh fled from Malden at the approach of the Americans.

They had been gone scarce an hour, when the head of the American column appeared playing Yankee
Doodle.

Fernando Stevens was with Colonel Johnson's riflemen, when, on the 29th of September, they reached
Detroit, while Harrison was encamped at Sandwich.

Informed that Proctor and Tecumseh were flying eastward toward the Moravian town on the river
Thames, or La Tranche, as the French called the stream, eighty miles
from Detroit, the American forces, about thirty-five hundred strong,
on October 2, 1813, began pursuit.

Johnson's mounted riflemen led the van, while General Selby, a hero of King's Mountain, followed
with his Kentuckians, eager to avenge the slaughter of their friends
at River Raisin.

For three days the pursuit continued.

At last, on the morning of the 5th of October, the army came up with Proctor. Fernando was
with the advance guard when they came on a small party of Indians.

The sharp crack of their rifles warned the armies to prepare for action, and both began to form.

The
victory which followed properly belonged to Johnson and his mounted
Kentuckians, though, as historians seldom know any one save the heads
of armies, it has been accorded to Harrison.

Fernando galloped back to Colonel Johnson and informed him that the enemy was posted on a narrow
strip of dry land, with the river Thames on the left, and a swamp on the right. Tecumseh, with about twelve
hundred savages, occupied the extreme right on the eastern margin of the swamp. The infantry,
eight hundred in number, were posted between the river and swamp, the men drawn up in open order.
They waited for Harrison's orders to attack. The general at first designed to attack with infantry;
but, perceiving the position of the British regulars to be favorable
for a charge, he turned to Johnson and asked:

"Will you undertake
it?"

"I have accustomed my men to it from the first," he answered.

"Then charge!" The whole cavalcade, more than a thousand strong, went thundering over the solid
plain. In the whole range of modern warfare, perhaps there has never been a charge which, for
reckless, romantic courage, could compare to this.

The Kentuckians were armed only with long-barrelled rifles, hatchets and knives. None had sabres,
so essential to cavalry; few had pistols, and there was not a carbine
among them; but, as Johnson had said, they were accustomed to those
charges on horseback, and could load and fire those long rifles with
marvellous rapidity even while in the saddle.

Their hatchets and knives were as deadly as the sabre. As they thundered down on the enemy, leaving
the infantry and General Harrison a mile behind, Johnson discovered that the ground on which the British
were drawn was too narrow for his whole regiment to charge abreast, so he divided his force,
sending his brother Lieutenant-Colonel James Johnson with one division, against the regulars,
while he with the other turned off into the swamp, and fell like a tornado upon the Indians under
Tecumseh.

Fernando went with the division against the British; but he heard the splashing of mud and water,
the cracking of rifles and wild shouts of combatants, as, through smoke, spray, mud and low bushes,
the Kentuckians under Colonel Johnson charged the ambushed Indians. His own division continued
galloping forward, until they were close on the British, who opened a heavy fire. The fire checked
them; but Johnson shouted:

"Forward, Kentuckians!"

Ashamed of their momentary hesitation, the men shook their bridles and, with wild huzzahs, dashed
right through the enemy, shooting right and left. Wheeling rapidly about, as soon as the British
line was passed the Kentuckians poured in a destructive volley on their rear, and they fled,
or threw down their guns and cried for quarter, which was granted. Proctor, with a part of his
command, escaped, leaving his carriage and papers.

Fernando's horse had been wounded in the shoulder, and as he dismounted to try to alleviate the
suffering of the poor beast, he heard the conflict still raging on
his right.

Colonel Johnson with his half of the Kentuckians had struck Tecumseh and was routing his entire
force. The Indians fought stubbornly until Tecumseh fell, and hearing his voice no longer
they fled in confusion. A complete victory was gained before General Harrison reached the field.

Some
historians of good authority state that Johnson shot Tecumseh with his pistol, just as his own
horse fell dead under him;--that as the colonel's horse was sinking
under innumerable wounds, he discovered a large Indian, whose regal
feathers denoted his rank, coming toward him with uplifted tomahawk.
He drew a pistol and shot him through the heart. This has been denied.
[Footnote: Seventeen years ago an aged man, who was in the conflict,
informed the author that he saw Tecumseh fall, that he was shot through
the head by a private soldier; "a big Kentuckian."]

Fernando accompanied
the army of General Harrison to Niagara to join the army of the centre;
but Harrison, becoming offended at General Armstrong, secretary of
war, resigned and quit the service. Fernando with his detached party,
seven only of Captain Rose's original company, joined the army under
Gen. Boyd on November 10th, 1813, was with them on the next day, the
11th, when they fought the enemy five hours at Chrysler's farm in
Canada. The Americans were driven from the field with a loss of three
hundred and thirty-nine.

The writer must pause a moment to mention
some of the stirring incidents in which Fernando did not participate.
On March 4th, 1813, Mr. Madison was inaugurated for his second term.
Terrence, who chanced to be in Washington, greeted the president with:
"Now Misther Prisident, we'll whip the British sure."

That he considered Felix entitled to a place in his private collection had been decided at
their first meeting. "Met a mask with a man behind it," he had announced to his intimates that
same night. "Got a fine nose for what's worth having. Located that chant book as soon as he
laid his hands on it. I didn't get any farther than the skin of his face and you won't, either.
He has promised to come over, and when you have rubbed up against him for half an hour, as
I did this morning, you will think as I do."

Since that time, Felix had spent many comforting hours in Kelsey's little back room. Sometimes
he would drop in about nine and remain until half past ten; at other times, it would be nearer
midnight before he would turn the knob.

As for the shop itself, nothing up and down "The Avenue" was quite as odd, quite as ramshackly,
or quite as picturesque. What the public saw, on either side of the down-two-steps entrance,
was a bench with slanting shelves, holding a double row of books and two patched glass windows,
protecting disordered heaps of prints, stained engravings, and old etchings, the whole embedded
in dust.

What the owner's intimates saw, once they got inside and continued to the end of the building,
was a low-ceiled room warmed by an old-fashioned Franklin stove and lighted by a drop covered
by a green shade. All about were easy chairs, a table or two, a sideboard, some long shelves
loaded down with books, and an iron safe which held some precious manuscripts and one or two
early editions.

When the room was shut the shop was open, and when the shop was shut, the shutters fastened,
and the two benches with their books lifted bodily and brought inside, the little back room,
smoke-dried as an old ham, and as savory and inviting, once you got its flavor, was ready for
his guests.

On one of these rare nights when the room was full, it happened that the same fifteenth-century
chant book, which had brought Tim and Felix together, was lying on the table. The discussion
which followed easily drifted into the influence of the Roman Catholic church on the art of
the period; Felix maintaining that but for the impetus it gave, neither the art of illumination
nor any of the other arts would at the time have reached the heights they attained.

"This missal is but an example of it," he continued, drawing the battered, yellow-stained book
toward him. "Whatever these old monks, with their religious fervor, touched they enriched and
glorified, whether it were an initial letter, as you see here, or an altar-piece; and more
than that, many of them painted wonderfully well."

"And a narrow-minded, bigoted lot they were," broke in Crackburn. "If they'd had their way
there would not have been a printing-press in existence. If you are going to canonize anybody,
begin with Aldus Minutius."

"Only a difference in patrons," chimed in Lockwood, "the difference between a pope and a doge."

"And it's the same to-day," echoed Kelsey, taking the book from O'Day's hand, to keep the leaves
from buckling. "Only it's neither pope nor doge, but the money king who's the patron. We should
all starve to death but for him. I've been waiting for Mr. O'Day to hunt one down and make
him buy this," he added, closing the book carefully. "Nobody else around here appreciates its
rarity or would give a five-dollar bill for it."

"Go slow," puffed old Silas, hunched up in his chair. "Money kings are good in their way, and
so perhaps were popes and doges, but give me a plain priest every time. You wonder, Mr. O'Day,
what those great masters in art could have done without the protection of the church. I wonder
what the poor of to-day would do without their priests. Go up to 28th Street and look in at
St. Barnabas's. Its doors are open from before sunrise until near midnight. When you are in
trouble, either hungry or hunted, and most of the poor are both, walk in and see what will
happen. You'll find that a priest in New York is everything from a policeman to a hospital
nurse, and he is always on his job. When nobody else listens, he listens; when nobody else
helps, he holds out a hand. I haven't lived here sixty years for nothing."

"When you say 'listen,'" asked Felix, whose attention to the conversation had never wavered,
"do you refer to the confessional?"

"I do not. That's the least part of it. So are the mass and the candles and choir-boys and
the rest of the outfit, all very well in their way, for Sundays and fast-days, but just so
much stage scenery to me, though its heaven to the poor devils who get color and music and
restful quiet in contrast to their barren homes. But praying before the altar is only one-quarter
of what these priests are doing every hour of the day and night. It's part of my business to
follow them around, and I know. Hand me a light, Tim, my pipe's out."

Felix, being nearest the box, struck a match and held it close to Silas's bowl, a cloud of
smoke rising between them. When it had cleared, O'Day remarked quietly: "Don't stop, Mr. Murford;
go on, I am listening. You have, as you said, only told us one-quarter of what these priests
are doing. Where do the other three-quarters come in?"

Silas rapped the bowl against the arm of his chair to clear it the better, and, twisting his
great bulk toward O'Day, said slowly: "If I tell you, will you listen and keep on listening
until I get through?"

Felix bowed his head in acquiescence. The others, knowing what a story from Silas meant, craned
their necks in his direction.

"Well! One night last winter--over on Avenue A, snow on the ground, mind you, and cold as Greenland--a
row broke out on the third floor of a tenement house. In the snow on the sidewalk shivered
a half-naked girl. She was sobbing. Her father had come in from his night shift at the gas
house, crazy drunk, a piece of lead pipe in his hand.

"Two or three people had stopped, gazed at the girl, and passed her by. Tenement-house rows
are too common in some districts to be bothered over. A policeman crossed the street, peered
up the stairway, listened to the screams inside, looked the sobbing girl over, and kept on
his way, swinging his club. A priest came along--one I know, a well-set-up man, who can take
care of himself, no matter where. He touched the girl's arm and drew her inside the doorway,
his head bent to hear her story. Then he went up--in jumps--two steps at a time--stumbling
in the dark, picking himself up again, catching at the rail to help him mount the quicker,
the screams overhead increasing at every step. When he reached the door, it was bolted on the
inside. He let drive with his shoulder and in it went. The girl's mother was crouching in the
far corner of the room, behind a heavy sofa. The drunken husband stood over her, trying to
get at her skull with the piece of lead pipe.

"At the bursting in of the door the brute wheeled and, with an oath, made straight for the
priest, the weapon in his fist.

"The priest stepped clear of the door-jamb, moved under the single gas-jet, drew out his crucifix,
and held it up.

"The drunkard stood staring.

"The priest advanced step by step. The brute cowered, staggered back, and fell in a heap on
the floor."

"Magnificent," broke out Lockwood. "Superb! And well told. You would make a great actor, Murford."

"Perhaps," answered Silas with a reproving look, "but don't forget that it HAPPENED."

"I haven't a doubt of it," exclaimed Felix quietly, "but please go on, Mr. Murford. To me your
story has only begun. What happened next?"

Silas's eyes glistened. Lockwood's criticism had gone over his head; he was accustomed to that
sort of thing. What pleased him was the interest O'Day had shown in his pet subject--the sufferings
of the poor being one of his lifelong topics of thought and conversation.

"The confessional happened next," replied Silas. "Then a sober husband, a sober wife, and a
girl at work--and they are still at it--for I got the man a job as night-watchman in the custom-house,
at Father Cruse's request."

Felix started forward. "You surely don't mean Father Cruse of St. Barnabas's?" he exclaimed
eagerly.

"Exactly."

"Was it he who burst in that door?"

"It was, and there isn't a tramp or a stranded girl within half a mile of where we sit that
he doesn't know and take care of. So I say you can have your money kings and your popes and
your doges; as for me, I'll take Father Cruse every time, and there's dozens just like him."

Felix pushed back his chair, reached for his hat, said good night in his usual civil tone,
and left the shop, Murford merely nodding at him over the bowl of his pipe, the others taking
no notice of his departure. It was the way they did things at Kelsey's. There were no great
welcomings when they arrived and no good-bys when they parted. They would meet again the next
night, perhaps the next morning--and more extended courtesies were considered unnecessary.

All the way back to Kitty's the erect figure of Father Cruse, holding the emblem of his faith
in that dimly lighted room stood out clear. He wondered why he had not seen more of the man
whose courage and faith he himself had dimly recognized at their first meeting, and determined
to cultivate his acquaintance at once. Long ago he had promised Kitty to do so. He would keep
that promise by timing his visit so as to reach St. Barnabas's when the service was over. The
balance of the evening could then be spent with the father.

He glanced at his watch and a glow of satisfaction spread over his face as he noted the hour.
Kitty would be up, and he would have the opportunity of delighting her with the details of
the tribute Murford had paid her beloved priest. The more he pictured the effect upon her,
the lighter grew his heart.

He began before the knob of the sitting-room had left his hand and had gone as far as: "Oh
I heard something about a friend of yours who--" when she checked him by rising to her feet
and exclaiming:

"Hold on a minute and listen to me first. I have something that belongs to ye. I found it after
ye'd gone out, and ran after ye. I thought ye'd miss it and come back. I wonder ye didn't.
Ye see I was tidyin' up yer room, and yer brush dropped down behind the bureau; and when I
pushed it out from the wall I found this under the edge of the carpet. Ye better keep these
little things in the drawer." Her hand was in the capacious pocket of her apron as she spoke,
her plump fingers feeling about its depths. "Oh, here it is," she cried. "I was gettin' nigh
scared ter death fer fear I'd lost it. Here, give me your cuff and I'll put it in fer ye."

"What is it? A cuff button?" he asked, controlling his disappointment but biding his time.

"Yes, and a good one."

"I'm sorry, Mistress Kitty, but it cannot be mine," he returned with a smile. "I have but one
pair, and both buttons are in place, as you can see," and he held out his cuffs.

"Well, then, who can this one belong to? Take a look at it. It's got arms on one button and
two letters mixed up together on the other," and she dropped it into his hand.

Felix held the sleeve-links to the light, smothered a cry and, with a quick movement of his
hands, steadied himself by the table.

"Where did you get this?" he breathed rather than spoke.

"I just told ye. Down behind the bureau where ye dropped it, along with your hair-brush."

Felix tightened his fingers, straining the muscles of his arms, striving with all his might
to keep his body from shaking. He had his back to her, his face toward the lamp, and had thus
escaped her scrutiny. "I haven't lost it," he faltered, prolonging the examination to gain
time and speaking with great deliberation.

"Ye haven't! Oh, I am that disappointed! And ye didn't drop it? Well, then, who did drop it?"
she cried, looking over his shoulder. She had been thinking all the evening how pleased he
would be when she returned it, and in her chagrin had not noticed the mental storm he was trying
to master.

"And ye're sure ye didn't drop it?" she reiterated.

"Quite sure," he answered slowly, his face still in the shadow, the link still in his hand.

"Well, that's the strangest thing I ever heard! We don't have nobody--we ain't never had nobody
up in that room with things on 'em like that. The fellow that John and I fired didn't have
no sleeve-buttons."

"Perhaps somebody else may have dropped it," he answered, sinking into a chair. He was devouring
her face, trying to read behind her eyes, praying she would go on, yet fearing to prolong the
inquiry lest she should discover his agitation.

"No, there ain't nobody," she said at last, "and if there was there wouldn't--Stop! Hold on
a minute, I got it! You've bin here six months or more, ain't ye?"

Felix nodded, his eyes still fastened on her own. A nod was better than the spoken word until
his voice obeyed him the better.

"An' ye ain't had a soul in that room but yerself since ye've been here? Is that true?"

Again Felix nodded.

"Of course it's true, whether ye say it or not. What a fool I was to ask ye! I got it now.
That sleeve-link belongs to a poor creature who slept in that room three or four days before
ye come and skipped the next morning."

Felix's fingers tightened on the arm of the chair. For the moment it seemed to him as if he
were swaying with the room. "Some one you were kind to, I suppose," he said, lifting a hand
to shade his face, the words coming one at a time, every muscle in his body taut.

"What else could we do? Leave the poor thing out in the cold and wet?"

"It was, then, some one you picked up, was it not?" The room had stopped swaying and he was
beginning to breathe evenly again. He saw that he had not betrayed himself. Her calm proved
it; and so did the infinite pity that crept into her tones as she related the incident.

"No, some one Tom McGinniss picked up on his beat, or would have picked up hadn't John and
I come along. And that wet she was, and everything streamin' puddles, an' she, poor dear, draggled
like a dog in the gutter."

Felix's sheltering hand sagged suddenly, exposing for a moment his strained face and wide-open
eyes.

"I didn't understand it was a woman," he stammered, turning his head still farther from the
light of the lamp.

"Yes, of course, it was a woman, and a lady, too. That's what I've been a-tellin' ye. Here,
take my seat if that light gets into your eyes. I see it's botherin' ye. It's that red shade
that does it. It sets John half crazy sometimes. I'll turn it down. Well, that's better. Yes,
a lady. An' she wet as a rat an' all the heart out of her. An' that link ye got in yer hand
is hers and nobody else's. John and I had been to evening service at St. Barnabas's, an' we
hung on behind till everybody had gone so as to have a word with Father Cruse, after he had
taken off his vestments. We bid him good night, come out of the 29th Street door, and kept
on toward Lexington Avenue. We hadn't gone but a little way from the church, when John, who
was walking ahead, come up agin Tom McGinniss. He was stooping over a woman huddled up on them
big front steps before you get to the corner.

"'What are you doin', Tom?' says John.

"'It's a drunk,' he says, 'an I'll run her in an' she'll sleep it off and be all the better
in the mornin'.'

"'Let me take a look at her, Tom,' says I; an' I got close to her breath and there was no more
liquor inside her than there is in me this minute.

"'You'll do nothin' of the kind, Tom McGinniss,' says I. 'This poor thing is beat out with
cold and hunger. Give her to me. I'll take her home. Get hold of her, John, an' lift her up.'

"If ye'd 'a' seen her, Mr. O'Day, it would have torn ye all to pieces. The life and spirit
was all out of her. She was like a child half asleep, that would go anywhere you took her.
If I'd said, 'Come along, I'm goin' to drown ye,' she'd 'a' come just the same. Not one word
fell out of her mouth. Just went along between us, John an' I helpin' her over the curbs and
gutters until she got to this kitchen, an' I sat her down in that chair, close by the stove,
and began to dry her out, for her dress was all soaked in the mud and streamin' with water.
I got some hot coffee into her, an' found a pair of John's old shoes, an' put 'em on her feet
till I had dried her own, an' when she got so she could speak--not drunk, mind ye, nor doped;
just dazed like as if she had been hunted and had given up all hope. She said like a sick child
speakin': 'You've been very kind, and I'm very grateful. I'll go now.'

"'No, ye won't,' I says; 'ye'll stay where ye are. Ye don't leave this place to-night. Ye'll
go up-stairs and git into my bed.' She looked at me kind o' scared-like; then she looked at
John an' our big man Mike who had come in while I was dryin' her out, but I stopped that right
away. 'No, ye needn't worry,' I said, 'an' ye won't. Ye're just as safe here as ye would be
in your mother's arms. Ye ain't the first one my man John an' I have taken care of, an' ye
won't be the last. Take another sip o' that hot coffee, an' come with me.'

"Well, we got her up-stairs, an' I helped her undress, an' when I unhooked her skirt an' it
fell to the floor, I saw what I was up aginst. She had the finest pair of silk stockings on
her feet ye ever seen in your life, and her petticoat was frills up to her knees. She said
nothin' an' I said nothin'. 'Git in,' I said, an' I turned down the cover and come out. The
next mornin' the boys had to get over to Hoboken, an' I was up before daylight and then back
to bed again. At seven o'clock I went to her room and pushed in the door. She was gone, an'
I've never seen her since. That cuff-link's hers. Take it up-stairs with ye an' put it in the
wash-stand drawer. I'll lose it if I keep it down here, an' she's bound to come back for it
some day. What time is it? Twelve o'clock, if I'm alive! Well, then, I'm goin' to bed, and
you're goin', too. John's got his key, and there's his coffee, but he won't be long now."

Felix sat still. Only when she had finished busying herself about the room making ready to
close the place for the night did he rouse himself. So still was he, and so absorbed that she
thought he had fallen asleep, until she became aware of a flash from under the overhanging
brows and heard him say, as if speaking to himself: "It was very good of you. Yes, very good--of
you--to do it, and--I suppose she never came back?"

"She never did," returned Kitty, drawing a chair away from the heat of the stove, "and I'm
that sorry she didn't. I'll fix the lights when ye've gone up. Good night to ye."

"Good night, Mrs. Cleary," and he left the room.

In the same absorbed way he mounted the stairs, opened his own door and, without turning up
the gas, sank heavily into a chair, the link still held fast in his hand. A moment later he
sprang from his seat, stepped quickly to the gas-jet, turned up the light, and held one of
the small buttons to the flame, as if to reassure himself of the initials; then with a smothered
cry fell across the narrow bed, his face hidden in the quilt.

For an hour he lay motionless, his mind a seething caldron, above which writhed distorted shapes
who hid their faces as they mounted upward. When these vanished and a certain calm fell upon
him, two figures detached themselves and stood clear: a woman cowering on a door-step, her
skirts befouled with the slime of the streets, and a priest with hand upraised, his only weapon
the symbol of his God.

Chapter XII

The morning brought him little relief. He drank his coffee in comparative silence and crossed
the street to his work with only a slight bend of his head toward Kitty, who was helping Mike
tag some baggage. She noticed then how pale he was and the wan smile that swept over his face
as she waved her hand at him in answer, but she was too busy over the trunks to give the subject
further thought.

Masie was waiting for him in the back part of the shop, which, by the same old process of moving
things around, had been fitted up into a sort of private office for Kling, two high-back settles
serving for one wall, three bureaus for another, while some Spanish chairs, a hair-cloth sofa
studded with brass nails, an inlaid table, and a Daghestan rug helped to make it secluded and
attractive. Kling liked the new arrangement because he could keep one eye on his books and
the other on the front door, thus killing two birds with one stone. Masie loved it because
when Felix had so many customers that he could neither talk nor play with her, it served her
as a temporary refuge--as would a shelter until the rain was over--and Felix delighted in it
because it kept Kling out of the way, the good-natured Dutchman having often spoiled a sale
by what Felix called "inopportune remarks at opportune moments."

Although Masie's business on this particular morning was nothing more important than merely
saying good-by to her "Uncle Felix" before she went to school, her wee stub of a nose had,
until she saw him cross the street, been flattened against the glass of her father's front
door, her two eager, anxious eyes fixed on Kitty's sidewalk. Felix was over an hour late, something
which had never happened before and something which could not have happened now unless he had
either overslept himself--an unbelievable fact, or was ill--a calamity which could not be thought
of for a moment.

While a nod and a faint smile had done for Kitty, and a "No, I was not very well last night,"
had sufficed for Kling, whose eyebrows made the inquiry--he never finding fault with O'Day
for lapses of any kind--the case was far different when it came to Masie. The little lady had
to be coaxed into one of the easy chairs in the improvised office and comforted with an arm
around her shoulder, to say nothing of having her hair smoothed back from her face, followed
by a kiss on her white forehead, before her overwrought anxieties were allayed.

That he was not himself was apparent to every one. Masie was still sure of it when she bade
him good-by, and Kling became convinced of it long before the day was over. As the afternoon
wore on, however, he grew calmer. His indomitable will began to reassert itself. His manner
became more alert, and his glance clearer. 

He was sitting on his mother's knee. How long he had been sitting there he did not know, nor did
he know how he came there; but he knew that it was his mother and that they were in a great
covered wagon, and that he had a sister and brother, older than himself, in the wagon. The
wagon was filled with household effects, which he seemed to know belonged to that mother on whose
knee he sat and that father who was sitting on the box driving the
horses which pulled the wagon.

Fernando Stevens was never exactly certain as to his age at the time of this experience; but
he could not have been past three, and perhaps not more than two years old, when he thus found
himself with his father's family and all their effects in a wagon going somewhere.

He knew not from whence they came, nor did he know whither they were
going.

It was pleasant to sit on his mother's knee and with his great blue eyes watch those monster horses
jogging along dragging after them the great world, which in his limited comprehension was all
the world he knew,--the covered wagon. Suddenly some bright, revolving object attracted his attention,
and he fixed his eyes on it. It was the wagon tire, and he saw it crushing and killing the grass
at the side of the road, or rolling and flattening down the dust in long streaks.

Then they descended a hill. It was not a long hill, but seemed rather steep. There was water at
the bottom. He remembered seeing the bright, sparkling wavelets and never forgot the impression they
produced. There was a boat at the bottom of the hill, and the wagon and horses were driven into
the boat. A man and boy began propelling the long sweeps or oars. He watched the proceeding
in infantile wonder and especially remembered how the water dropped
in sparkling crystals from the oar blades.

The boy had on a red cap or fez with a tassel. That boy, that cap and that oar with the sparkling
dripping water from the blade were to him the brightest pictures and greatest wonders he had
ever known.

He had not the least idea why the man and boy dipped those oars into the water and pulled them
out all dripping and pretty, unless it was to amuse him. The oars were painted blue. He did
not know where they were going, or when this journey would end, or that it was a journey.

Thus Fernando Stevens began life.

This was the first page in his existence that he could recollect. In after years he knew he was
Fernando Stevens, that his father was Albert Stevens, a soldier in the War of the Revolution,
that his kind, sweet-faced mother was Estella Stevens, and that the very first experience
he could remember was that of the family emigrating to the great
Ohio valley.

Albert Stevens was married shortly after the close of the Revolutionary War, and he tried hard
to succeed in New England; but he had no trade and no profession, and the best lands in the
country were bought. Seven years of his early life, with all his dawning manhood had been spent
in the army, and now with his family of three children he found himself poor. Congress had made
a treaty with the Indians by which the vast territory of the Ohio valley was thrown open to
white settlers, and he resolved to emigrate to where land was cheap, purchase a home and grow
up with the country.

Resolved to emigrate, the father collected his little property and provided himself with a wagon
and four horses, some cows, a rifle, a shot-gun and an axe. His trusty dog became the companion
of his journey. In his wagon he placed his bedding, his provisions and such cooking utensils as
were indispensable. Everything being ready, his wife and the three children took their seats,
Fernando, the youngest, on his mother's knee; while the father of the family mounted the box. The horses
were started and the great vehicle began to move. As they passed through the village which had been
to them the scene of many happy hours, they took a last look at the spots which were hallowed
by association--the church with its lowly spire, an emblem of that humility which befits a Christian,
and the burial-ground, where the weeping willow bent mournfully over the head-stone which marked the
graves of their parents. The children, who were old enough to remember, never forgot their playground,
nor the white schoolhouse where the rudiments of an education were
instilled into their minds.

Their road was at first, comparatively smooth and their journey pleasant. Their progress was interrupted
by divers little incidents; while the continual changes in the appearance of the country around
them, and the anticipation of what was to come, prevented those feelings of despondency, which
might otherwise have arisen on leaving a much loved home. When the roads became bad or hilly,
the family quit the wagon and trudged along on foot, the mother carrying
the baby Fernando in her arms.

At sunset, their day's journey finished, they halted in the forest by the roadside to prepare
their supper and pass the night. The horses were unharnessed, watered and secured with their
heads to the trough until they had eaten their meagre allowance of corn and oats, and then were
hobbled out to grass.

Over the camp fire the mother prepared the frugal supper, which being over, the emigrants arranged
themselves for the night, while the faithful dog kept watch. Amid all the privations and vicissitudes
in their journey, they were cheered by the consciousness that each day lessened the distance
between them and the land of promise, whose fertile soil was to recompense
them for all their trials and hardships.

Gradually, as they advanced west, the roads became more and more rough and were only passable
in many places by logs having been placed side by side, forming what
was termed corduroy roads.

The axe and rifle of the emigrant, or mover as he is still termed in the west, were brought
daily and almost hourly into use. With the former he cut saplings, or small trees, to throw across
the roads, which, in many places, were almost impassable; while with his rifle he killed squirrels,
wild turkeys, or such game as the forest afforded, for their provisions were in a few days exhausted.
If, perchance, a buck crossed his path, and he brought it down by
a lucky shot, it was carefully dressed and hung up in the forks of
the trees; fires were built, and the meat cut into small strips and
smoked and dried for future subsistence.

As they advanced, the road through the woods became more difficult to travel, the trees being merely
felled and drawn aside, so as to permit a wheeled carriage to pass;
and the emigrant was often obliged to be guided in his route only
by the blaze of the surveyor on the trees, and at every few rods to
cut away the branches which obstructed his passage.

As the stroke of the axe reverberated through the woods, no answer came back to assure him
of the presence of friend or foe.

At night in these solitudes, they heard the wolves stealing through the gloom, sniffing the scent
of the intruders; and now and then, then bloodshot eyes of the catamount
glared through the foliage.

Days, weeks and months passed in this toilsome journey through the wilderness, so indelibly impressing
it on the memory of Fernando Stevens, that he never, to his dying day, forgot that journey.
At last they arrived at the landmarks which, to Albert Stevens, indicated the proximity of his
possessions.

A location for the cabin was selected near a small stream of running water, on the south side of
a slight elevation.

No time was lost. The trees were immediately felled, and in a short time Fernando, looking
out from the covered wagon, perceived a clear space of ground of but few rods in circumference.
Stakes, forked at the top, were driven into the ground, on which the father placed logs, and the
chinks between these were stopped with clay.

An enclosure was thus hastily thrown up to protect the family from the weather, and the wife and
children were removed to this improvised abode. The trunks of the trees were rolled to the edge of
the clearing, and surmounted by stakes driven crosswise into the
ground: the severed tops and branches of trees piled on top of the
logs, thus forming a brush fence.

By degrees the surrounding trees were "girdled" and killed.

Those that would split were cut down and made into rails, while others were left to rot or logged
up and burned.

A year showed a great improvement in the pioneer's home. Several acres had been added to the
clearing, and the place began to assume the appearance of a farm.

The temporary shanty had given place to a comfortable log cabin;
and although the chimney was built of small sticks placed one on the
other, and filled in between with clay, occupying almost one whole
end of the cabin, it showed that the inward man was duly attended
to; and the savory fumes of venison, of the prairie hen and other
good things went far to prove that even backwoods life was not without
its comforts.

[Footnote: The author has often heard his mother say that the most enjoyable period of her life
was in a pioneer home similar to the above.]

In a few months, the retired cabin, once so solitary, became the nucleus of a little settlement.
Other sections and quarter sections of land were entered at the land office by new corners.
New portions of ground were cleared, cabins were erected; and in a short time the settlement
could turn out a dozen efficient hands for house raising or log rolling.

A saw mill soon after was erected at the falls of the creek; the log
huts received a poplar weather boarding, and, as the little settlement
increased, other improvements appeared; a mail line was established,
and before many years elapsed, a fine road was completed to the nearest
town, and a stage coach, which ran once, then twice a week, connected
the settlement with the populous country to the east of it.

This was the life the hero of this story began. It might be said to be an unromantic life; yet
such a life was known to many of our American ancestors. It had its pleasures as well as its
pains.

It had its poetry as well as its prose, and its joys as well as its
sorrows.

The vastness of the forest and depths of the solitude by which he was surrounded, made its impress
on his mind.

He grew up in ignorance of tyranny and many of the evils of the great cities.

The cabin home and the narrow clearing about it formed his playground. His first toy was a half-bushel
measure, which he called his "bushee!" This he rolled before him around the log cabin and the
paths made in the tall grass, frequently to the dread of his mother,
who feared that he might encounter some of the deadly serpents with
which the forest abounded.

He remembered on one occasion, when his mother found him going too
far, she called:

"Come back, Fernando; mother is afraid you will
step on a snake."

He looked about him with the confidence of childhood, and answered:

"No
'nakes here."

Just at that moment, the mother, to her horror, saw a deadly reptile
coiled in the very path along which the child was rolling his "bushee,"
and with true frontier woman's pluck, ran and snatched up the bare-footed
Fernando, when only within two feet of the deadly serpent, carried
him to the house, and with the stout staff assailed and killed the
rattlesnake.

He remembered seeing the wild deer bound past the cabin door, and
one day his father killed one.

The big dog called "Bob," on account of the shortness of his caudal appendage, on another occasion
leaped on a wild buck as he was passing the house, and seized the
animal, holding it until it was slain.

Wild turkeys were common; he saw them in great flocks in the woods,
and did not suppose they could ever become extinct.

Fernando never forgot his first pair of shoes. He had grown to be quite a lad, and his bare
feet had trod the paths in the forest, and over the prairies in summer
and late in autumn, until they had become hardened.

In winter his mother had made him moccasins out of deer skins; but
he was at last informed that he was going to have a pair of shoes,
such as he had seen some children from the eastern States wear.

His joy at this intelligence knew no bounds. He dreamed of those shoes at night, and they
formed the theme of his conversation by day.

His sister, who was the oldest of the children, had been the happy
possessor of three pairs of shoes, and she often discussed knowingly
the good qualities of pedal coverings and of their advantages in travelling
through brambles or over stones.

Often as he contemplated his scratched, chapped and bruised feet, the child had asked himself if
it were possible that he should ever be able to afford such a luxury as a real pair of shoes.

Money
was scarce, luxuries scarcer. The frontier people lived hard, worked hard, slept sound, and enjoyed
excellent health.

Though little Fernando had never owned a real pair of shoes in his life, so far as he could remember,
he possessed a strong mind and body, and no prince was his superior. He had, as yet, never been
to school a day, but from the great book of nature he had imbibed sublimity and loftiness of
thought, which only painters and poets feel.

Though he was shoeless, he was inspired with lofty ideas of freedom such as many reared in
cities never dream about. The father had to make a long journey to some far-away place for the
shoes. The day before starting all the children were made to put their feet on the floor, while
the parents measured them with strings, and tied knots to indicate the size of shoes to be purchased.
At last the measures were obtained, and the father put them in the pocket of his buckskin hunting
jacket. Then he harnessed the horses to the wagon and, with, his
trusty rifle for his only companion, drove away.

Bob, the faithful watch-dog, was very anxious to accompany him, and whined and howled for two or
three days; but he was kept at home to defend the family. A faithful protector was Bob, and woe
to the intruder who dared to annoy the household while he was around. Fernando waited patiently
and long for the return of his father.

Every night before retiring to his trundle-bed, he would ask his mother if "father would come
next day."

At last the joyous shout of the older children announced the approach of the wagon. They ran down
the road to meet it. The horses jogged along with the wagon, which rolled and jolted over the
ground to the house. The wagon was unloaded.

There were bags of meal and flour, coffee and tea, and then came the calico and cotton goods,
jugs of molasses and a barrel of sugar. The shoes were in a box and finally brought out.

A great disappointment was in store for Fernando. His shoes were too small. The father had lost
the string and purchased the shoes "by guess."

Fernando tried hard to squeeze his foot into the little green coverings; but they were so
small and there was danger of bursting them. Father had to go back to the land office in a day
or two and would exchange them. He rode off on the white mare, "old Betts," and on his return
had a pair of shoes large enough for Fernando.

They were awkward at first and cramped, pinched and galled his feet.
His mother made him a suit of clothes of "blue drilling" and next
Sabbath the whole family got into the wagon and drove off eight miles
to Bear Creek to "meeting."

The people of the west were as thorough
a combination and mixture of all nations, characters, languages, conditions
and opinions as can well be imagined. Scarcely a nation in Europe,
or a State in the union, that did not furnish emigrants for the great
west. I have it in my trunk. It is one of a pair my wife gave
me on my birthday, the year we were married. I missed it from my jewel case after she left,
and thought somebody had stolen it. Now I know that my wife must have taken it, and then dropped
it at Mrs. Cleary's. So I came here tonight hoping against hope--it was so many months ago--to
get some further information regarding her. Then I remembered that I had not asked Mrs. Cleary
what the woman looked like, and I was about to return home, when that poor girl staggered in,
and I got a look at her face. I lost my hold on myself then and--"

He sprang to his feet and began striding across the room, his eyes blazing, one clinched fist
upraised: "By God! Father Cruse, I know something of Dalton's earlier life and of what he is
capable. And I tell you right here, that if he has brought my wife to that, I shall kill him
the moment I set my eyes on him. To take a child of a woman, foolish and vain as she was--stupid
if you will--and--" he halted, covered his face in his hands, and broke into sobs.

During the long recital Father Cruse had neither spoken nor moved. He was accustomed to such
outbursts, but it had been many years since he had seen so strong a man weep as bitterly. Better
let the storm pass--he would master himself the sooner.

A full minute elapsed, and then, with a groan that seemed to come from the depths of his being,
O'Day lifted his head, brushed the hot tears from his eyes, and continued:

"You must forgive me, for I am utterly broken up. But I can't go on any longer this way! I
have got to let go--I have got to talk to somebody. That dear woman with whom I live is kindness
itself and would do anything she could for me, but somehow I cannot tell her about these things.
I may be wrong about it--but I was born that way. You know black from white--you live here
right in the midst of it--you see it every day. Mr. Silas Murford told me the other night at
Kelsey's that you knew everybody in this neighborhood, and so I came to you. Help me find my wife!"

Father Cruse drew his chair closer and laid his hand soothingly on O'Day's knee.

"It is unnecessary for me to tell you I will help you," he answered in his low, smooth voice:
"And now let us get to work systematically and see what can be done. I will begin by asking
you a few questions. What sort of a looking woman is your wife?"

Felix straightened himself in his chair, felt in his inside pocket, and took from it a colored
photograph. "As you see, she is rather small, with fair hair, blue eyes, and a slight figure--the
usual English type. She has very beautiful teeth--very white--teeth you would never forget
once you saw them; and she has quite small ears and, although the picture does not show this,
small hands and feet."

"And how would she dress now? This evidently was taken some years ago. I mean, what was her
habit of dress? Would it be such as an Englishwoman would wear?"

Felix pondered. "Well, when Lady Barbara left she had--"

An expression of surprise on the priest's face cut short the sentence. O'Day looked at him
in a startled way; then he recalled his words.

"Pardon me, but it is only fair that you should know that Lady Barbara is the daughter of Lord
Carnavon, and that since my father's death they call me Sir Felix. I have never used the title
here and may never use it anywhere. I would have assumed some other name when I arrived here,
except that I could not bring myself to give up my own and my father's--he never did anything
to disgrace it. He was caught in a trap, that is all, and I signed away everything I could
to help him out. He stood by me when I was in India, and when he had a shilling he gave me
half. I would rather have died, much as my wife blamed me, than not to have done what I did.

"And I would do it all over again, although I did not realize how big the load was until settling-day
came. Dalton was at the bottom of it all. He floated the company. There was a story going around
the clubs that he had got me into squaring it all up, knowing that I would be done for, and
he could get away with her easier, but I never believed it. He has come into his own, if this
wretched, suffering woman that Mrs. Cleary picked up is my wife; and I will come into mine"--here
his eyes flashed--"if he has dragged her down and--"

Father Cruse again laid his quieting fingers this time on Felix's wrist.

"He has not dragged her down, Mr. O'Day. Of that you may be sure. A woman of her class doesn't
go to pieces in a year. When she reaches the end of her means she will either seek work or
she will go to one of the institutions to wait until she can hear from her people at home.
I have known--"

Felix shook his head with an impatient movement. "You don't know her," he exclaimed excitedly,
"nor do you know her family. Her father has shut his door against her, and would step across
her body if he found it on the sidewalk rather than recognize her. Nor would she ask him for
a penny, nor let him or me or any one else know of her misery."

Again the priest sat silent. He did not attempt to defend his theory--some better way of calming
his visitor must be found. He merely said, as if entirely convinced by O'Day's denial: "Oh,
well, we will let that go, perhaps you know best"; and then added, his voice softening, "and
now one word more, before we go into the details of our search, so that no complications may
arise in the future. You, of course, are hunting for Lady Barbara to reinstate her as your
wife if--"

O'Day sprang from his chair and stood over the priest. The suggestion had come as a blow.

"I will take her back!"

The priest looked up in astonishment. "Yes, is it not so?"

The answer came between closed teeth. "I did not expect that of you, Father Cruse, I thought
you were bigger--MUCH bigger. Can't you understand how a man may want to stand by a woman for
herself alone without dragging in his own selfishness and--No, I forgot--you cannot understand--you
never held a woman in your arms--you do not realize her many weaknesses, her childishness,
her whims, her helplessness. But take her back? NEVER! That chapter in my life is dosed. My
hunt for her all these months has been to save her from herself and from the scoundrel who
has ruined her. When that is done I shall pick up my life as best I can, but not with her."

For some seconds the priest did not speak. Then he said gently, again avoiding any disagreement.
"Let us hope that so happy an ending to all your sufferings is not far off, my dear Mr. O'Day.
And now another question before we part for the night, one I perhaps ought to have asked you
before. Are you quite positive that Kitty's visitor was your wife?"

He had reserved this hopeful suggestion--one he himself believed in--for the last. It would
help lift the dead weight of bitter anxiety which was sure to overwhelm his visitor in the
wakeful hours of the night.

Felix moved impatiently, like one combating a physician's cheering words. "It must have been
she, who else could have dropped the sleeve-link?"

"Several people. Excuse me if I talk along different lines, but I have had a good deal of experience
in tracing out just such things as this, and I have always found it safest to be sure of my
facts before deducing theories. It is not all clear to me that Kitty's woman dropped the links.
And even if she did, the fact is no proof that the woman is your wife."

"But the links are mine. There is no question of it--my initials and arms are cut into them."
The impatience was gone and a certain curiosity was manifesting itself.

"Quite true, and yet you once thought the links were stolen. So let us presume for the present
that they were stolen and that this woman either bought them, or was given them, or found them."

Felix began pacing the floor, a gleam of hope illumining the dark corners of his heart. The
interview, too, had calmed him--as do all confessions.

The priest settled back in his seat. He saw that the crisis had passed. There might be another
outburst in the future, but it would not have the intensity of the one he had just witnessed.
He waited until Felix was opposite his chair and then asked, in a low voice: "Well, may I not
be right, Mr. O'Day?"

Felix paused in his walk and gazed down at the priest. "I don't know," he answered slowly.
"My head is not clear enough to think it out. Mrs. Cleary might help unravel it. She saw her
and will remember. Shall I sound her when I go home--not to excite her suspicions, of course,
but so as to find out whether her visitor were large or small--details like that?"

"No, I will ask her, and in a way not to make her suspect. She will think I am hunting for
one of my own people. It is wiser that she should not know yet what you have told me. I would
rather wait for the time when this poor creature, whoever she is, needs a sister's tenderness.
She will get it there, for no finer woman lives than Kitty Cleary."

A sigh of intense relief escaped Felix. "And now tell me where you will begin your hunt?" he
asked, one of his old search-light glances flashing from beneath his brows.

"Nowhere in particular. On the East Side, perhaps, where I have means of knowing what strangers
come and go. Then among my own people here. I shall know within twenty-four hours whether she
has been in the habit of attending evening service--that is, within the last six months. A
woman of the poorer class would be difficult to locate, but there should not be the slightest
trouble in picking out one who, less than a year ago, occupied your wife's social position--no
matter how badly she were dressed."

Felix stood musing. He had reached the limit of the help he had come for.

"And what can I do to assist?"

"Nothing. Go home, and when I need you I will send word. Good night."

Chapter XIII

Had Felix continued his visits to Stephen Carlin's shop, he might have escaped many sleepless
hours and saved himself many weary steps.

Fate had doubtless dealt him one of those unlucky cards which we so often find in our hands
when the game of life is being played. If, for instance, the book to the right, holding the
lost will, had been opened instead of the book to the left; or if we had caught the wrecked
train by a minute or less; or had our penny come up heads instead of coming up tails: how many
of the ills of life would have been avoided? And so I say that had Felix continued his visits
to Stephen as he should have done, he would, one December afternoon, have found the ship-chandler
standing in the door, spectacles on his nose, checking off a wagon-load of manila rope which
had just been discharged on his pavement, stopping only to nod to the postman who had brought
him a letter. The delay in breaking the seal was due entirely to the fact that a coil of light
cordage, used aboard the yachts he was accustomed to fit out, had just been reported as missing,
and so the unopened letter was tossed on top a barrel of sperm-oil to await his convenience.
But it was when Stephen caught sight of the small cramped writing scrawled over the cheap yellow
envelope, the stamp askew, his own name and address crowded in the lower left-hand corner,
that the supreme moment really arrived, for at that instant--had Felix been there--he would
have seen Carlin slit the covering with his thumb-nail, lay aside his invoice, and drop on
the first seat within reach, to steady himself.

Indeed, had Felix on this same December afternoon surprised him even an hour later, say at
six o'clock, which he could very well have done, for Carlin did not close his shop until seven,
he would have come upon him with the same letter in his hand, his whole mind absorbed in its
contents, especially the last paragraph: "Be here at seven o'clock, sharp; don't ring the bell
below, just rap twice and I shall know it is you. I have to be very careful who I let in."

It had been several weeks since Carlin had heard from his sister. She had called at the store
on her return from Canada, where she had spent the summer, and he had helped her find a small
suite of rooms on a side street off St. Mark's Place, which she subsequently occupied, but
since then she had never crossed his threshold. At first she had kept him advised of her nursing
engagements--the days when her work carried her out of town, or the addresses of those who
needed her in the city. These brief communications having entirely ceased, he had decided in
his anxiety to look her up and, strange to say, on that very night. That his hand trembled
and his rough, weather-browned face became tinged with color as he read her letter to the end,
turning the page and reading the whole a second time, would have surprised anybody who knew
the stern, silent old sailor. His clerk, a thin, long-necked young man wearing a paper collar
and green necktie, noticed his agitation and guessed wrong--Carlin being a confirmed old bachelor.
And so did the driver of the wagon, who had to wait for his receipt and who, wondering at Stephen's
emotion, would have asked what the letter was all about had not the ship-chandler, after consulting
his watch, crammed the envelope into his side pocket, jumped to his feet, and shouted to the
Paper Collar to "roll the stuff off that sidewalk and get everything stowed away, as he was
going up to St. Mark's Place."

Here and there in the whir of the great city a restful breathing-spot is found, its stretch
of grass dotted with moss-covered tombs grouped around a low-pitched church. At certain hours
the sound of bells is heard and the low rhythm of the organ throbbing through the aisles. Then
lines of quietly dressed worshippers stroll along the bordered walks, the children's hands
fast in their mothers' the arched vestibule-door closing upon them.

Most of these oases, like Trinity, St. Paul's, and St. Mark's, differ but little--the same
low-pitched church, the same slender spire, the same stretch of green with its scattered gravestones.
And, outside, the same old demon of hurry, defied and hurled back by a lifted hand armed with
the cross.

Of these three breathing-spaces, St. Mark's is, perhaps, a little greener in the early spring,
less dusty in the summer heat, less bare and uninviting in the winter snow. It is more restful,
too, than the others, a place in which to sit and muse--even to read. Out from its shade and
sunshine run queer side streets, with still queerer houses, rising two stories and an attic,
each with a dormer and huge chimney. Dried-up old aristocrats, these, living on the smallest
of pensions, taking toll of notaries public, shyster lawyers, peddlers of steel pens, die-cutters,
and dismal real-estate agents in dismal offices boasting a desk, two chairs, and a map.

Stephen's course lay in the direction of one of these relics of better days--a wide-eyed house
with a pieced-out roof, flattened like an old woman's wig over a sloping forehead, the eyebrows
of eaves shading two blinking windows. A most respectable old dowager of a building, no doubt,
in its time, with the best of Madeira and the choicest of cuts going down two steps into its
welcoming basement. That was before the iron railings were covered with rust and before the
three brownstone steps leading to the front door were worn into scoops by heavy shoes; before
the polished mahogany doors were replaced by pine and painted a dull, dirty green; before the
banisters with their mahogany rail were as full of cavities as a garden fence with half its
palings gone; and before--long before--some vulgar Paul Pry had cut a skylight in the hipped
roof, through which he could peer, taking note of whatever went on inside the gloomy interior:
each of these several calamities but so much additional testimony to its once grand estate,
and every one of them but so many steps in its downward career.

For it had become anything but a happy house--this old dowager dwelling of the long ago. Indeed,
it was a very mournful and most depressing house, and so were its tenants. In the basement
was a barber who spent half his time lounging about inside the small door, without his white
jacket, waiting for customers. On the first-floor-back there was a music-teacher whose pupils
were so few and far between that only the shortest of lessons at the longest of intervals were
recited on her piano; on the second-floor-front was a wood-engraver who took to photography
to pay his rent. On the second-floor-back was a dressmaker who could not collect her bills;
while in the rear was a laundress who washed for the tenants. Lastly, there was Mrs. Martha
Munger, Stephen Carlin's sister, who occupied the third floor both front and back, over the
laundress's quarters, the one chimney serving them both.

While the evil eye of the skylight, despite its dishonorable calling, might have been put to
some good use during the day, it can be safely said that it was of no earthly, and for that
matter of no heavenly, use during the night. Nor did anything else in the way of illumination
take its place. My Lady Dowager's patrons were too poor or too stingy to furnish even a single
burner up and down the three flights. The excuse was that the rays of the arc-light, blazing
away on the opposite side of the street, were not only powerful enough to shine through the
weather-beaten hall door covering the entrance but, still further, to illuminate the rickety
staircase--the very staircase up which Stephen Carlin was now groping in answer to Martha's letter.

She had heard his heavy tread on the creaky steps, and was watching for him with the door ajar--an
inch at first, and then wide open, her kerosene lamp held over the railing to give him light.

"Oh, but I'm glad you've come, Stephen. I was getting worried. I was afraid maybe you didn't
get the letter. It's black dark outside, isn't it?" and she glanced at the cheap clock on the
mantel behind her. "Come in, the kettle was boiling over when I heard you. I'll talk to you
in a minute."

He followed with only a pressure of her hand, and, without a word of greeting, seated himself
near a table. In the same quiet, silent way he watched her as she busied herself about the
apartment, lifting the kettle from the stove, adjusting the wick of the lamp which had begun
to smoke from the draft of the open door, taking from a shelf two cups and saucers and from
a tin bread box a loaf and some crackers.

When, in one of her journeys to and fro, she passed where the light of the lamp fell full upon
her round face, framed in its white cap and long strings, he gave a slight start. There were
dark circles below her eyes and heavy lines near the corners of her mouth--signs he had not
seen since the month she had spent in the Marine Hospital when the plague was stamped out.
He noticed, too, that her robust figure, with its broad shoulders and capacious bosom, restful
pillow to many a new-born baby, seemed shrunken--not in weight, but in its spring, as if all
her alertness (she was under fifty) had oozed out. It was only when she had completed her labors
and taken a chair beside him, her soft, nursing hand covering his own, that his mind reverted
to the tragedy which had brought him to her side. Even then, although she sat with her face
turned toward his, her eyes reading his own, some moments passed before either of them spoke.
At last, in a wondering, dazed way, she exclaimed: "Have you, in all your life, Stephen, ever
heard anything like it?"

Carlin shook his head. The letter had given him the facts, and no additional details could
alter the situation. It was as if a dead body were lying in the next room awaiting interment;
when the time came he would step in and look at it, ask the hour of burial, and step out again.

"I came as soon as I'd read your letter," he said slowly examining one by one his rough fingers
bunched together in his lap. "We got chuck-a-block on Second Avenue or I'd have been here before.
Why didn't you let me know sooner?" As he spoke he shifted his gaze to the wrinkles in her
throat--a new anxiety rising as he noticed how many more had gathered since he saw her last.

"She wouldn't have it, and I want to tell you that you've got to be careful, as it is. And
mind you don't speak too sudden to her."

In answer he craned his head as if to see around the jamb of the door leading into the smaller
room and, lowering his voice, whispered: "Is she here now?"

"No, but she will be in a few minutes; she's often late, she waits until it's dark."

"How long has she been here with you?"

"About two weeks."

"Two weeks! You didn't tell me that."

"She wouldn't let me. She is having trouble enough and I have to do pretty much as she wants."

He ruminated for a moment, this time scrutinizing the palms of his hands, seemingly interested
in some callous spots near the thumb-joint, and then asked: "How did she find you?"

"By God's mercy and nothing else. I was sitting in a Third Avenue car and there she was opposite.
I couldn't believe my eyes, she was that changed! She would have been off the dock, I believe,
if she hadn't found me. She has run away from Dalton now, and is so scared of him she trembles
every time some one comes up the stairs. That's why I wrote you not to ring. He has nothing
left. He kept a-hounding her to write to her father and nigh drove her crazy; so she left him."

"Does she know Mr. Felix is here?" He had finished with the callous spots and was cracking
every horny knuckle in his fingers as he spoke, as if their loosening might help solve the
problem that vexed him.

"No, I haven't dared tell her. She would be off the dock for sure then. She is more afraid
of him than she is of Dalton."

"Mr. Felix won't hurt her," he rejoined sharply.

"Yes, but she knows she'd hurt HIM if he finds out how bad she's off. She'd rather he'd think
she's living like she used to do. Oh, Stephen--Stephen, but it's a bad, bad business! I'm beat
out wondering what ought to be done."

She pushed back her chair, and began walking up and down the room like one whose suffering
can find no other relief, pausing now and then to speak to him as she passed. "I tried to get
her to listen. I told her Mr. Felix might be coming over from London. I had to put it to her
that way, but she nearly went out of her mind, stiffened up, and began to put on such a wild
look that I had to stop. Have you heard from him lately?"

"No, I wrote and wrote and could get no answer. Then I went up to where he boarded, and the
woman told me he'd been gone some months--she didn't know where. He left no word, and she forgot
to get the name of the express that came for his trunk. He is down with sickness somewheres,
or he'd have showed up. He was not himself at all when I last saw him--that's long before you
got back from Canada. He's done nothing but walk the streets since he come ashore."

Stephen stopped, as if it were too painful for him to continue, looked around the room, noting
its bareness, and asked, with a break in his voice: "Where do you put her?"

"In the little room. She wouldn't take mine and she won't let me help her. She got work at
first on 14th Street, in that big store near the Square, and worked there for a while, that
was when she was with Dalton. But Dalton drove her out. And when she was near dead, with nothing
to eat, some people picked her up and she stayed with them all night--she never told me where.
That was last spring. She stood it for some months living from hand to mouth, she working her
fingers to the bone for him, until she was afraid of her life and left him again. She was going
she didn't know where when I looked at her 'cross the car and she saw me.

"'Martha!' she cried, and was on the seat next me, my two arms about her. She was sobbing like
a lost child who has found its mother again. There were two other women in the car, and they
wanted to help, but I told them it was only my baby back again. We were near 10th Street at
the time and I got her out and brought her here and put her to bed--Listen! Keep still a moment!
That's her step! Yes, thank God, she's alone! I'm always scared lest he should come with her.
Get in there behind the curtain!"

Martha had lifted the lamp again as she spoke, and was holding it over the banister, one hand
down-stretched toward a woman whose small white fingers were clutching the mahogany rail, pulling
herself up one step at a time.

"Don't hurry, my child. It's a hard climb, I know. Give me the box. I began to get worried.
Are you tired?"

"A little. It has been a long day." She sighed as she passed into the room, the nurse following
with a large pasteboard box.

"It's good to get back to you," she continued, sinking into a chair near the mantel and unfastening
her cloak. "The stairs seem to grow steeper every time I come up. Thank you. Just hang it behind
the door. And now my hat, please." She lifted the cheap black straw from her head, freeing
a fluff of light-golden hair, and with her fingers combed it back from her forehead.

"And please bring me my slippers. I have walked all the way home, and my poor feet ache."

The nurse stooped for the hat, patted the thin shoulders, and went into the adjacent room for
the slippers, whispering to Carlin on her way back to keep hidden until she called. He was
still standing concealed by the folds of the calico curtain dividing the apartment, a choke
in his throat as he watched the frail woman, her sharpened knees outlined under the folds of
the black dress and, below it, the edge of a white petticoat bespattered with mud, the whole
figure drooping as if there were not strength enough along its length to hold the body upright.
What shocked him even more were the deep-sunken eyes and the hollows in the cheeks and about
the brows. All the laugh and sparkle of the once joyous, beautiful girl he had known were gone.
Only the gentle voice was left.

Martha was now back, kneeling on the floor, untying the shabby shoes, rubbing the small, delicately
shaped feet in her plump hands to rest and warm them. "There, my lamb, that's better," he heard
her say, as she drew on the heelless slippers. "I'll have tea in a minute. The kettle's been
boiling this hour." Then, as though it were an afterthought: "Stephen wants to see you, so
I told him maybe you would let him. Shall I tell him to come?"

"Your brother, you mean? The one who lives here in New York?" she asked listlessly.

"Yes, he's never forgotten you. And--"

"Some day I will see him, Martha. I shall be better soon, and then--"

She stopped and stared at Carlin, who misunderstanding Martha's words, had drawn aside the
calico curtain and was advancing toward her, bowing as he walked, the choke still in his throat.
"I hope your ladyship is not offended," he ventured. "It was all one family once, if I may
say so, and there is only Martha and me."

She had straightened as she saw him coming and then, remembering that she was in Martha's room,
and he Martha's brother, she held out her hand. "No, Stephen, I am very glad. I was only a
little startled. It is a long time since I saw you, but I remember you quite well, and you
have not changed. A little grayer perhaps. When was it?"

"When I came back from Calcutta, your ladyship, and the Rover was wrecked. Your father ordered
the crew home. I was first mate, your ladyship remembers, and had to look after them. Some
six years agone, I take it."

"Yes, it all comes back to me now," she answered dreamily "six years--is it not more than that?"

"No, your ladyship. Just about six."

She paused, rested her head on her hand, and looked at him intently from beneath the wave of
hair that had dropped again about her brow, and asked: "Why do you still call me 'your ladyship'
Stephen?"

"Well, I don't know, your ladyship. Mebbe it's because I've always been used to it. But I won't
if your ladyship doesn't want me to."

"Never mind, it does not matter. It has been so long since I have heard it that it sounded
odd, that was all." She roused herself with an effort and added, in a brighter tone, changing
the topic: "It was very good of you to come to see Martha. She has me to look after now, and
I am afraid she gets unhappy at times. You cannot think how good she is to me--so good--so
good! I often wake in the night dreaming I am a child again and stretch out my hand to her,
just as I used to do years ago when she slept beside me. She often speaks of you. I am glad
you came to-day."

Carlin had been standing over her all the time, his rough pea-jacket buttoned across his broad
chest, his ruddy sailor's face with its fringe of gray whiskers, bushy eyebrows, and clear,
steady gaze in vivid contrast to her own shrinking weakness.

"It ain't altogether Martha," he exclaimed in tones suddenly grown deliberate. "It's you, your
ladyship, that I particular came to see. You ain't fit to take care of yourself, and there
ain't nobody but me and Martha that I can lay hands on now to help--nobody but just us two.
I'm not here to judge nobody. I know what's happened and what you're going through, and you've
got to let me lend a hand. If I lived to be a hundred I could never forget his lordship's kindness
to me, and things can't go on as they are with you. There is a way out of it if you only knew it."

She threw back her head quickly. "Not my Father?"

"No, not your father. Although his lordship would haul down his colors mighty quick if once
he saw you as I do now. But there are others who would be glad to take a hand at the wheel
and help you steer out of all this misery. You ain't accustomed to it and you don't deserve
it, and I'm going to put a stop to it if I can." This last came with still greater emphasis--the
first mate was speaking now.

"Thank you, Stephen. You and Martha are very much alike. She has the loyalty of an old servant,
and you have the loyalty of an old friend. But we must all pay for our mistakes--" she halted,
drew in her breath, and added, picking at her dress, "--and our sins. Everybody condemns us
but God. He is the only one who forgets, when we are sorry."

"Not so many remember as you may think, your ladyship. Some of 'em have forgotten--forgotten
everything--and are standing by ready to catch a line or man a boat."

"Yes, there are always kind people in the world."

"Well, there mayn't be such an awful lot of 'em as you think, but I know one. There's Mr. Felix,
for instance, who--"

She sprang to her feet, her hands held out as a barrier, and stood trembling, staring wildly
at him, all the blood gone from her cheeks. "Stop, Stephen! Not another word. You must not
mention that name to me. I cannot and will not permit it. I have listened too long already.
I am very grateful for your kindness and for your offers to me, but you must not touch on my
private affairs. I am earning my own living, and I shall continue to do so. And now I would
like to be alone."

"But, your ladyship, I've got something to tell you which--"

Martha stepped between them. "I think, Stephen, you'd better not talk to her ladyship any more.
You might come some other night when she's more rested. You see she's had a very bad day and--"

Stephen's voice rang out clear. "Not say anything more, when--"

Martha dug her fingers into his arm. "Hush!" she whispered hoarsely, her lips close against
his hairy cheek. "She'll be on the floor in a dead faint in a minute. Didn't I tell you not
to mention his name?"

She stepped quickly to the side of her charge, who had walked falteringly toward the window
and now stood peering into the darkness through the panes of the dormer.

"It's only Stephen's way, child, and you mustn't mind him. He doesn't mean anything. He hasn't
seen much of women, living aboard ship half his life. It's only his way of trying to be kind.
And you see he's known you from a baby, same as me--and that's why he lets out."

She had folded the pitiful figure in her arms, her hand patting the bent shoulders. "But we'll
get on together, my lamb--you and me. And we'll have supper right away--And I must ask you,
Stephen, to go, now, because her ladyship is worn out and I'm going to put her to bed."

Carlin picked up his hat and stood fingering the rim, trying to make up his mind whether he
should force the truth upon her then or obey orders and wait. The training of long years told.

"Well, just as you say, your ladyship, I won't stay if you don't want me, but don't forget
I'm within call, not more than a half-hour away. All Martha's got to do is to send a postal
card and I'm here. I'm sorry I hurt your feelings. God knows I didn't mean to! Martha knows
what I wanted to tell you. You'll have to come to it sooner or later. Good night. I hope your
ladyship will be rested in the morning. Good night, Martha. You know you can write when you
want me. Good night again, your ladyship."

He opened the door softly, closed it behind him without a sound, placed his hat on his head,
and, reaching out for the hand-rail, felt his way in the dark down the rickety stairs and out
onto the sidewalk.

Once there, he looked up and down the street as if undecided, turned sharply, and bent his
steps toward Second Avenue, muttering to himself over and over again as he walked: "I got to
find Mr. Felix. I got to find Mr. Felix."

Chapter XIV

Felix O'Day's runaway wife, despite the many quiet hours spent in Martha's room, near St. Mark's
Place, had not told her old nurse all her story. She had wept her heart out on the dear woman's
shoulder and had cuddled close in her arms, giving her scraps and bits of her unfortunate history,
with side-lights here and there on a misery so abject and so terrifying that the dear nurse
had hugged the frail figure all the tighter, seeing only the wound and knowing nothing of the
steps that had led up to the final blow or the anger that hastened it.

Martha had known, of course, that there had been bankruptcy and ruin; that Oakdale, the ancestral
estate of the O'Days--theirs for two centuries, with all its priceless old furniture, tapestries,
pictures, and porcelains--had, after the owner's death, been sold at public auction; that Fernlodge,
Mr. Felix's own home, had gone in the same way; that Lady Barbara, for some reason, had returned
to her father, Lord Carnavon; that the girl baby had died; and that "Mr. Felix," as she always
called him, had gone to London where he had taken up his abode at his club. Lady Barbara herself
had given these details in a letter written a couple of weeks after the death of the child,
Martha being in Toronto at the time.

Martha had also learned, through a letter from the head gardener's wife, that after a few months'
stay, Lady Barbara had left her father's house because of a fierce scene with Lord Carnavon,
who had sent for his carriage, conducted her into it, and given directions to his coachman
either to set his daughter down on the main road, outside his gates, or to take her to the
nearest public house.

She had learned, too, that her former charge, after having eloped with Dalton, had dropped
entirely out of sight and, so far as her own knowledge was concerned, had never come to light
again until, with a cry of joy, Lady Barbara sank sobbing on her shoulder in that Third Avenue car.

Much of this information had been gathered from newspaper clippings that her old uncle, living
in London, had mailed to her. More particulars had come in a letter from James Muldoon, one
of the grooms at Oakdale, who gave a most pitiful and graphic account of the way the London
dealers crowded about the old porcelains in the ebony cabinets, and of the prices paid by the
Earl of Brinsmore, who bought most of the pictures, half of the old Spanish furniture, as well
as the largest but one of the great tapestries, to enrich the new mansion he was then building
in London and in which James Muldoon was happy to say he had been promised a place.

In still other letters, open references had also been made to a much discussed speculation,
entangling many of those whom Martha had formerly known, followed by a grand financial explosion
in which some of the same people had been badly injured. In connection with these disasters
mention was likewise made of a certain Mr. Dalton, who had disappeared shortly after, leaving
rather a bad name behind him, altogether undeserved, according to many of the papers, he always
having been a "financier of the highest standing." This last ball of gossip was rolled Martha's
way by her nephew, who was a clerk in a solicitor's office off the Strand and who had mailed
an editorial on the matter to his uncle, who promptly forwarded it to Martha. She had read
it carefully to the end and had put it in her drawer without at first grasping the full meaning
of the fact that, but for the activities of this same Mr. Dalton, her dear mistress and her
dear mistress's husband, Felix O'Day, and her dear mistress's father-in-law, the late Sir Carroll
O'Day, would still be in possession of their ancestral estates and in undisturbed enjoyment
of whatever happiness they, individually and collectively, could get out of life.

What the dear woman never knew, and it was just as well that she did not, were the special
happenings which ended in the overwhelming catastrophe.

It really began with a tea basket, holding enough for two, which was opened one lovely afternoon
under the big willows skirting that little strip of land bordering the backwater at Cookham-on-Thames.
My lady at the time was wearing a wide leghorn hat with blue ribbons that matched her eyes
and set off the roses in her fair English cheeks. Her companion was in white flannels--a muscular,
well-set-up young man of thirty, fifteen years younger than her husband and with twice his
charm--one of those delightful companions who possess the rare quality of making an hour seem
but five minutes. A gay party had dropped down the river in her father's launch, which had
been tied up at Ferry Inn, and Dalton had insisted on taking my lady for just a half-hour's
poling in a punt, Felix and the others preferring to take their tea at the Inn--plans readily
agreed to and carried out, except that the half-hour prolonged itself into two whole ones.

Then there had come a week-end at Glenmore Castle and a garden party outside London, and then
five-o'clock teas at half a dozen private houses, including one or two meetings a trifle more
secluded. And all quite as it should be, for a most desirable and valuable guest was this same
Mr. Guy Dalton, a man received everywhere with open arms, as "one of the rising men of the
time, my dear sir," a financier of distinction, indeed, and a promoter of such skill that he
had only to issue a prospectus, or wink knowingly on the street, or take you aside at the club
and whisper confidentially to you, when everything he had issued, winked at, or whispered about
would go up with a rush, and countless men and women--a goodly number were women--would be
hundreds, nay, thousands of pounds the richer before the week was out.

That his own buoyant imagination, as well as that of those who followed his lead, should have
been stretched to the utmost was quite within the possibilities when one recollects that the
basis of all this wealth was crude rubber, a substance of pronounced elasticity. This, too,
accounts for the vim and suddenness of the final recoil attending the final collapse--a recoil
which smashed everything and everybody within its reach.

There were "words," of course, between Dalton and some of his victims. There always are "words"
when the ball bounces back and you catch it full in the eye. And for salves and soothing plasters
there were the customary explanations regarding the state of the market, the tightness of money,
the non-arrival of important details, the delaying of despatches owing to a break in the cable,
together with offers of heavy discounts, and increased allotments of stock for renewed subscriptions.
But the end came, just as it always does.

And so did the aftermath, as was shown by the advertisements in the auction columns of the
daily papers and the motley mob of hungry, perspiring dealers, pawing over the household gods;
and, more disastrous still, because of its rarity, Felix's brave fight to save his father's
name, the whole struggle ending in his own ruin.

As for the very pretty young woman who had been wearing the hat with blue ribbons, it may be
as well to remark that when the milk in the heart of a woman has become slightly curdled, it
is to be expected that, under certain exciting influences, the whole will turn sour. When to
this curdling process is added the loss of her child and her fortune, calamities made all the
more insupportable by reason of an interview lasting an hour in which her two hot hands were
held in those of a sympathetic man of thirty, her cheeks within an inch of his lips, the quickest--in
fact, the only way--yes, really the only way, to prevent any further calamity is to put your
best gown in your best dressing-case, catch up your jewels, and exchange your husband's roof
for that of your father's. And this is precisely what my lady did do, and there in her father's
house she stayed, despite the entreaties of her own and her father's friends.

"And why not?" she had argued, with flashing eyes: "I am without a shilling of my own, owing
to the Quixotic ideas of my husband, who, without thinking of me, has beggared himself to pay
his father's debts. And that, too, just when I need to be comforted most. He does not care
how I suffer; and now that my father has offered me a home, I will lead my own life, surrounded
by the few friends who have loved me for myself alone."

That the eminent financier--it might be better perhaps to say the LATE eminent financier--was
one of those same unselfish beings who had "loved her for herself alone," and that he had,
at once and without the delay of an hour, flown to her side followed as a matter of course,
as did the gossip, men and women in and about the clubs and drawing-rooms nodding meaningly
or hinting behind their hands.

"Rather rough on O'Day," the men had agreed. "That comes of marrying a woman young enough to
be your daughter." "She ought to have known better," was the verdict of the women. "So many
other ways of getting what you want without making a scandal," this from a duchess from behind
her fan to a divorcee. But few words of sympathy for the deserted husband escaped any of them
and, except from his old servants, Felix allowed himself to receive none.

He had made no move to win her back. To him she was, at the worst, only the same wilful and
spoiled child she had always been, while he was over twenty years her senior. What he hoped
for was that her common sense, her breeding, and her pride would come to the rescue, and that
after her pique had spent itself, she would become once more the loving wife.

And it is quite possible that this hope might have been realized had it not been for one of
those unfortunate and greatly to be regretted concurrences which so often precede if they do
not precipitate many of life's catastrophes.

One of Lord Carnavon's grooms was the unfortunate match that caused this explosion. He had
been sent down to Dorsetshire for a horse and, in an out-of-the-way inn in one corner of the
county, had stumbled--early the next morning--into a cosey little sitting-room. When he came
to his senses--he never recovered the whole of them until he was safe once more inside his
lordship's stables--he told, with bulging eyes and bated breath, what he had seen. Whereupon
the head coachman forthwith informed his wife, who at once poured it into the ears of the housekeeper,
who, being jealous of my lady, fearing her dominance, lost no time in amplifying the details
to Lord Carnavon. That gentleman had walked his library the rest of the night and, on my lady's
return from Scotland, two mornings later (she had "spent the night with her aunt"), had denounced
her in tones so shrill that every word was heard at the end of the long gallery; the tirade,
to his lordship's amazement, being cut short by his daughter's defiant answer: "And why not,
if I love him?"

All of which accounts for the infamous order roared five minutes later by the distinguished
nobleman to his coachman, who, having known her ladyship from a child and loved her accordingly,
had not set her down on the main road, but had taken her to a cottage on an adjoining estate--her
second change of roofs--from whence Dalton carried her off next day to Ostend, a refuge she
had herself selected, the season there being then at its height.

Had either of them kept a diary, it is safe to say that the delirious hours which filled that
first week at Ostend would have been checked off in gold letters. Neither of them had ever
been so blissfully happy, nor so passionately enamoured of the other, nor so overjoyed that
the dreary past, with all its misunderstandings, calumnies, and injustice, had been wiped out
forever.

There had, of course, been a few colorless moments. On a certain Saturday, for instance, the
eminent ex-financier, having lost his head after the manner of some born gamblers, had, at
the Casino, played the wrong number--a series of wrong numbers, in fact--an error which resulted
in his pushing a crisp bundle of Bank of England notes--almost all he had with him--toward
the spidery hands of a suave gentleman with rat eyes and bloodless face, who gathered them
up with a furtive, deadly smile.

The gold Letters might have been omitted here, and, in their stead, my lady could have made
a common pinhole to remind her, if she ever cared to remember, that it was on that very night
that her passionately enamoured lover had helped her unfasten from her throat a string of pearls
which O'Day had given her, and which, strange to say, for a woman so injured, so maligned,
and so misunderstood, she, with Dalton's advice, had carried off when she deserted both her
husband and her husband's bed and board. And she might have inserted just below the pinhole
the illuminating note that, after unfastening the string, Dalton had forgotten to return it.

And then there had come an August morning--the following Monday, to be exact--when, his coffee
untasted, he had sat staring at a paragraph in the financial column of a London paper, not
daring to lay it down for fear she would pick it up. It gave a full and detailed account of
the discovery of a series of certificates bearing duplicate numbers, said duplicates claiming
to be the genuine shares of the Bawhadder Rubber Co., Ltd. It also hinted at a searching investigation
about to be made by a financial committee of the highest standing at its next regular meeting,
but a few days off. More important still was a crisp editorial, charging the directors of the
aforesaid company, and particularly its promoter--name withheld--with irregularities of the
gravest import.

And it was on this same Monday morning--another pinhole, made with a big black pin would serve
best here--before the stone-cold coffee and the dry, uneaten toast had been sent away, that
there had arrived a most important telegram (that is, Dalton had SAID it had arrived) ordering
him back to London on business of the UTMOST IMPORTANCE. So urgent were the summons that he
was forced to leave at once--so he explained to the manager of the hotel--and as madame wished
to avoid the night journey by way of Ostend--the channel being almost always rough, even in
summer, and she easily disturbed--he had decided to take the shorter and more comfortable route,
and would the urbane and obliging gentleman please secure two tickets to London by way of Calais
and Dover? This would give them a day in Paris at the house of a friend, and the next morning
would see them safely landed in London, in ample time for the business in question.

The pins can be dispensed with now; so can the pencil and so can any special entries. Henceforth
life for these two exiles was to be one long toboggan slide, with every post they passed marking
a lower level. The sled with its occupants made no stop at Paris nor did it go by way of Calais
nor did it reach Dover. It swooped on down to Havre, the steamer sailing an hour after the
train arrived, crossed the ocean at full speed, and dumped its two passengers one hot August
night in front of a cheap and inconspicuous hotel on the East Side, New York, where Mr. and
Mrs. Stanton, from Toronto, Canada, would he at home, should anybody call--which, it is quite
safe to say, nobody ever did.

No, nothing of all this did the heart-broken woman tell the tender old nurse, who had carried
her in her arms many a night, and who was now willing to sacrifice everything she possessed
to give her mistress one hour of peace.

Nor did she tell of the shock which she, a woman of quality, had received when she entered
the two cheaply furnished rooms, her only shelter for months, and which, to a woman accustomed
from babyhood to a luxurious home and the care of attentive and loyal servants, had affected
her more keenly than anything that had yet happened.

Neither did she confide into the willing ears of the sympathetic woman the details of her gradual
awakening from Dalton's spell as his irritability, cowardice, and selfishness became more and
more apparent. Nor yet of her growing anxiety as their resources declined; an anxiety which
had so weighed upon her mind that she could neither sleep nor rest, despite his continued promises
of daily remittances that never came and his rose-colored schemes for raising money which never
materialized.

Neither did she uncover the secret places of her own heart, and tell the old nurse of the fight
she had made in those earlier days when she had faced the situation without flinching; nor
of her stubborn determination to still fight on to the end. She had even at one time sought
to defend him against herself. All men had their weaknesses, she had reasoned; Guy had his.
Moreover, the crash had been none of his doing. He had been deceived by false reports instigated
by his enemies, including her own father-in-law and--yes, her husband as well, who could have
avoided the catastrophe had he followed Guy's advice, and persuaded Sir Carroll O'Day to hold
on to his shares. How, then, could she desert him, poor as he was and with the world against
him? She had been untrue to everything else. Could she not redeem herself by being at least
true to her sin?

What she did tell Martha, and there was the old ring in her voice as she spoke, was of her
refusal to yield to Dalton's presistent entreaties to write to her father for sufficient money
to start him in a new enterprise which, with "even his limited means"--thus ran the letter
she was to copy and sign--"was already exceeding his most sanguine expectations, and which,
with a few thousand pounds of additional capital, would yield enormous returns." And she might
have added that so emphatic had been her refusal that, for the first time in all their intercourse,
Dalton's eyes had been opened to something he had never realized in her before, the quality
of the blood that runs in some Englishwomen's veins--this time the blood of the Carnavons,
who for two centuries had been noted for their indomitable will.

Her defiance had seemed all the more remarkable to him because as he well knew their combined
resources were dwindling. She had, in fact, only a few finger-rings left, together with some
cheap trinkets; among them a pair of sleeve-buttons then in her cuff's, a pair which she had
given Felix and which she found in her jewel-box the day after she left him, and which she
had determined to return until she realized how small was their value.

The rest of her sad story came by fits and starts.

With her head on Martha's shoulder she told of the horror of that rainy April night when, with
agonized hands against her hot cheeks, she had heard him stumbling up the narrow stairs staggering
drunk, lunging through the door, and falling headlong at her feet. Of the deadly fear born
in her, for the first time in her life, she, helpless and alone, without a human being to whom
she could appeal, not daring to disclose her own identity lest graver results might follow;
he, prostrate before her, naked to his inmost bone, with all his perfidy exposed. Of his cursing
her conscientious scruples and family pride, her milk-and-water principles, demanding again
that she should write her father and that very night, ending his entreaties with a blow of
his fiat hand on her cheek which sent her reeling toward her narrow bed.

She had watched her chance, caught up her hat and cloak, and had slipped down-stairs, avoiding
the crowd about the side-door, and had then fled as if for her life, to be found an hour later
by an expressman's wife, who had put her to bed with a kindness and tenderness she had not
known since she left her husband's roof.

Then there had followed a long, weary day's search for work, ending at last in defeat when,
disheartened and footsore, she had dragged herself once more up the hotel stairs, with another
tightening of her resolution to fight it out to the end.

Greatly to her surprise, Dalton had received her with marked politeness. He had begged her
forgiveness, pleading that his nerves had been upset by his financial troubles. With his arm
around her, he had told her how young and pretty she still was, and how sad it made him when
he thought he had ruined her life and brought her all these weary miles from home, his contrition
being apparently so genuine, that she had determined to trust him once more, and would have
told him so had she not gone into her room to change her dress, only to find that he had pawned
the few remaining trinkets and articles of wearing-apparel she possessed, in order to try his
luck in a neighboring pool-room.

She had realized, then, where she stood. There was but one thing for her to do and that was
to hunt again for work. She had been an expert needlewoman in her better days and this knowledge
might earn her their board.

With this in her mind, she had consulted a woman, living on the floor above, who had often
spoken to her when they passed each other on the stairs, and who was employed in a department
store on 14th Street near Broadway, the result being that Stiger & Company had given "Mrs.
Stanton" a place in the repair shop, her wages being equal to her own and Dalton's board. This
had continued all through the summer, her earnings keeping the roof over their heads, Dalton
leaving her for days at a time, his invariable excuse for his absence being that he was "trying
to get employment."

Finally--and again her eyes burned, and the color mounted to her hot cheeks as she reached
this part of her story--there had come that last awful, unforgettable December night.

She had come home from work and had put on a thin silk wrapper, too well worn for pawning,
when the door of their little sitting-room was opened and Dalton entered, bringing two men
with him. One of them kept his hat on as he talked, the other slouched his from his head after
he had taken a seat and had had a chance to look her over. The three had come upon her suddenly,
and she, realizing her dishabille, had risen hastily, excusing herself, when Dalton, who was
half tipsy, stepped between her and her bedroom door.

"No, you'll stay here," he had cried; "you're prettier as you are. I never saw you so fetching.
Don't mind them, they're friends of mine. We've ordered up something to drink."

She had stood trembling, looking from one to the other, her heart hammering wildly. No man
had ever addressed her with such insolence and before such company. What she feared was that
something would snap in her and she fall fainting to the floor.

"I will change my dress," she had answered firmly, speaking slowly to hide her terror. She
was Lord Carnavon's daughter now.

"No, I tell you, Barbara--I--"

There was something in her eyes that told him he had reached the limit of her forbearance.
Beyond that there was danger.

She had glided past him, shut and locked her bedroom door, struggled with bungling fingers
into her walking-dress, pinned on her hat, thrown an old silk waterproof around her shoulders,
had slid back the bolt of her chamber opening into the hall, crept down the steps, and fled.

Ten minutes later Martha's arms were about her, and she sobbing on her old nurse's shoulder.

Chapter XV

The day following Stephen's visit was one of many spent by Lady Barbara in working at "home,"
as she called the simple apartment in which Martha had given her shelter.

With the aid of a shop-girl whose mother Martha had known, she had found employment at Rosenthal's,
on upper Third Avenue. There had been need of an expert needlewoman in a department recently
opened, and Mangan, in charge of the work, had taken her name and address. The repairing of
rare laces had been one of her triumphs when a girl, she having placed an inset in the middle
of an old piece of Valenciennes which had deceived even the experts at Kensington Museum. And
so, when one of Rosenthal's agents had looked up her lodgings, had seen Martha, and noted "Mrs.
Stanton's" quiet refinement, he had at once given her the place. She had retained, with Martha's
advice, the name that Dalton had assumed for her on her arrival in New York, and Rosenthal's
pay-roll and messengers knew her by no other.

These days at home bad been gradually extended, her employer finding that she could work there
more satisfactorily, and of late the greater part of each week had been spent in the small
suite of rooms in St. Mark's Place--much to Martha's delight, who had arranged her own duties
so as to be with her mistress. The good woman had long since given up night-nursing, and the
few patrons dependent upon her during the day had had to be content with an "exchange," which
she generally managed to obtain, there being one or two of the fraternity on whom she could call.

And these days, in spite of the sorrow hovering over her charge, Martha never found wholly
unhappy. They constantly reminded her of the good times at Oakdale when she used to bring in
her young mistress's breakfast. She could recall the dainty, white egg-shell china, the squat
silver service bearing the Carnavon arms, and the film of lace which she used to throw around
her ladyship's shoulders, lifting her hair to give it room. The butler would bring the tray
to the door, and Martha would carry it herself to the bedside, where she would be met with
the cry, "Must I get up?" or the more soothing greeting of, "Oh, you good Martha--well, give
me my wrapper!"

The delicate porcelain and heirloom silver were missing now, and so was the filmy lace, but
the tired mistress, could sleep as long as she pleased, thank Heaven! and the same loving care
be given her. And the meal could be as nicely served, even though the thick cup cost but a
penny and the tea was poured from an earthen pot kept hot on the stove.

Martha's deft hands relieved her mistress, too, of many other little necessary duties, such
as the repair of her clothes; having them carefully laid out for the morning so that the nap
might be prolonged and time be given for the care of the beautiful hair and frail hands; helping
her dress; serving her breakfast, and getting her ready for the day's work. These services
over, Martha would move the small pine table close to the sill of the window, where the light
was better, spread a clean white towel over its top, and sit beside her while she sewed.

This restful, almost happy, life had been rudely shaken, if not entirely wrecked, by Stephen's
visit. Up to that time, Lady Barbara--who had been nearly three weeks with Martha--had not
only delighted in her work, but had shown an enviable pride in keeping pace with her employer's
engagements, often working rather late into the night to finish her allotment on time.

The particular work uppermost in her mind on the night Stephen had called was the repairing
of a costly Spanish mantilla which had been picked up in Spain by one of Rosenthal's customers.
Through the carelessness of a packer, it had been badly slashed near the centre--an ugly, ragged
tear which only the most skilful of needles could restore. Mangan, some days before, had given
it to her to repair with special instructions to return it at a given time, when he had agreed
to deliver it to its owner. It was with a sudden gripping of her heart, therefore, that Martha
on her return from an errand at noon had found the mantilla, promised for that very afternoon
at three o'clock, lying neglected on the table, Lady Barbara sitting by the window with listless
hands and drooping head. She grew still more anxious when at the appointed hour Rosenthal's
messenger rapped at the door and stood silently waiting, his presence voicing the purpose of
his mission, and she heard her mistress say, without an attempt at explanation: "I am sorry,
tell Mr. Mangan, but the Spanish mantilla is not finished. Some of the other pieces are ready,
but you need not wait. I cannot stop now, even to do them up properly, but I will bring the
mantilla myself to-morrow. Please say so to Mr. Mangan."

The extreme lassitude of her manner only added to Martha's anxiety and, as the afternoon wore
on, she watched Lady Barbara's every move with ever-increasing alarm. Now and then her poor
mistress would drop her needle, turn her face to the window, and look out into vacancy, her
mouth quivering as if with some inward thought which she had neither the will nor the desire
to voice aloud.

As the hours lengthened, this mental absorption and growing physical weariness were followed
by a certain nervous tension, so pronounced that the nurse, accustomed to various forms of
feminine breakdowns, had already determined what remedies to use should the symptoms increase.

That Stephen's visit was responsible for this condition, she now no longer doubted. What she
had intended as a relief had only complicated the situation. And yet in going over all that
had happened and all that was likely to happen, she became more than ever convinced that either
his visit must be repeated, or that she alone must make the announcement that had trembled
on Stephen's lips. She had recognized, almost from the first, that despite the relief her mistress
had enjoyed in the little apartment some strong, masculine hand and mind were needed to stem
the tide of further disaster. Her own practical common sense also told her that their present
way of living was far too precarious to be counted upon. Lady Barbara's position with Rosenthal
was but temporary. At any moment it might be lost, and then would follow another dreary hunt
for work, with all its rebuffs, and sooner or later the delicately nurtured woman would succumb
and go under in a mental or physical collapse, the hospital her only alternative.

None of these forebodings, it must be said, had filled Lady Barbara's mind. As long as she
continued under Martha's care she could rest in peace, free from the dread of the drunken step
on the stair or the rude bursting in of her chamber door. Free, too, from other deadly terrors
which had pursued her, and of which she could not even think without a shudder, for try as
she could she never forgot Dalton's willingness to turn their home into a gamblers' resort.

That he would force her to return to him for any other purpose she did not believe. He had
no legal hold upon her--such as an Englishman has upon his wife--and, as he had pawned everything
of value she possessed and most of her clothes, she could be of no further use to him, except
by applying to her father or to her friends for pecuniary relief. This, as she had told him,
she would rather die than do, and from the oaths he had muttered at the time she was convinced
he believed her.

All she wanted now was to earn her bread, help Martha with her rent, and, when the day's work
was over, creep into her arms and rest.

And yet, while it was true that Stephen's visit had been responsible for her nervous breakdown,
it was not for the reason that Martha supposed. His reference to her private affairs had of
course offended her, and justly so, but there was something else which hurt her far more--a
something in the old ship-chandler's manner when he spoke to her which forced to the front
a question ever present in her mind, whatever her task and however tender the ministrations
of the old nurse; one that during all her sojourn under this kindly roof had haunted her, like
a nightmare.

And it was this. What did the look mean that she sometimes surprised in Martha's eyes--the
same look she had detected in Stephen's? Were they looks of pity or were they--and she shuddered--looks
of scorn? This was the nightmare which had haunted her, the problem she could not fathom.

And because she could not fathom it, she had passed a wakeful night, and this long, unhappy
day. This mystery must end, and that very night.

When the shadows fell and the evening meal was ready, she put away her work, smoothed her hair
and took her seat beside the nurse, eating little and answering Martha's anxious, but carefully
worded questions in monosyllables. With the end of the meal, she pushed back her chair and
sought her bedroom, saying that, if Martha did not mind, she would throw herself on her bed
and rest awhile.

She lay there listening until the last clink of the plates and cups and the moving of the table
told her that the evening's work was done and the things put away; then she called:

"Martha, won't you come and sit beside me, so that you can brush out my hair? I want to talk
to you. You need not bring the lamp, I have light enough."

Martha hurried in and settled herself beside the narrow bed. Lady Barbara lifted her head so
that the tresses were free for Martha's hands, and sinking back on the pillow said almost in
a whisper: "I have been thinking of your brother, and want your help. What did he mean when
he said that things could not go on as they were with me? And that he was going to put a stop
to them if he could?"

Martha caught herself just in time. She was not ready yet to divulge her plans for her mistress's
relief, and the question had taken her unawares. "He never forgets, my lady, what he owes your
people," she answered at last. "And when he saw you, he was so sorry for you he was all shrivelled
up."

She had the mass of blonde hair in her fingers now, the comb in hand prepared to straighten
out the tangle.

For a moment Lady Barbara lay still, then turning her cheek, her eyes fixed on Martha's, she
said in firmer tones: "You are to tell me the truth, you know; that is why I sent for you."

"I have told it, my lady."

"And you are keeping nothing back?"

"Nothing."

The thin hand crept out and grasped the nurse's wrist.

"Then you are sure your brother does not despise me, Martha?"

"MY LADY! How can you say such a thing!" exclaimed Martha, dropping the comb.

"Well, everybody else does--everybody I know--and a great many I never saw and who never saw
me. And now about yourself--and you must tell me frankly--do you hate me, Martha?"

"Hate you, you poor Lamb"--tears were now choking her--"you, whom I held in my arms?--Oh, don't
talk that way to me--I can't stand it, my lady! Ever since you were a child, I--"

"Yes, Martha, that is one reason for my asking you. You did love me as a child--but do you
love me as a woman? A child is forgiven because it knows no better; a woman DOES know. Tell
me, straight from your heart; I want to know; it will not make any difference in the way I
love you. You have been everything to me, father, mother--everything, Martha. Tell me, do you
forgive me?"

"I have nothing to forgive, my lady," she answered, her voice clearing, her will asserting
itself. "You have always been my lady and you always will be. Maybe you'd better not talk any
more--you are all tired out, and--"

"Oh, yes, I will talk and you must Listen. Don't pick up my comb. Never mind about my hair
now. I know very well that there is not a single human being at home who would not shut the
door in my face. Some of them do not understand, and never will, and I should never try to
explain my life to them. I have suffered for my mistakes and made myself an outcast, and nobody
has any compassion for an outcast. That is why I sit and wonder about Stephen, and why I have
sat all day and wondered about you, and whether I ought to run away, for I could not stay here
if you felt about me as I know those people feel at home. I want you to love me, Martha. Oh!
yes, you prove it. You do everything for me, but way down deep in your heart, how do you feel?
Do you love me as you always did?--LOVE, Martha, not just pity, or feeling sorry like Stephen,
or blaming me like the others? Yes, yes, yes, I know it, but I have wanted you to tell me.
I am so in the dark. There, there, don't cry! Just one thing more. What did your brother mean
when he said there were others who would lift me out of my misery?"

Again the old servant, brushing away her tears, hesitated to reply. She had sent for Stephen
to answer this very question, and her mistress had practically driven him from the room. How,
then, was she to meet it?

"He meant Mr. Felix, and if you had only listened, my lady, he would have--"

"Yes, I knew he did--although he did not dare say it," she cried with sudden intensity, sinking
deeper back in her pillow as if to protect herself even from Martha. "I did not listen, for
I never want to hear his name again. He drove me to what I did. He let me leave his house without
so much as a word of regret, and not one line did he write me the whole time I was at my father's.
Two months, Martha! TWO--WHOLE--MONTHS!" The words seemed to clog in her throat. "All that
time he hid himself in his club, abusing me to every man he met. Somebody told me so. What
was I to do? He had turned over to his father every shilling he possessed and left me without
a penny--or, worse still, dependent on my father, and you know what that means! And then, when
I could stand it no longer and went home, he sailed for South Africa on a shooting expedition."

Martha listened patiently. The outburst was not what she had expected, but she knew the unburdening
would help in the end. She slid one plump hand under the tired head, and with the other stroked
back the mass of hair from the damp forehead--very gently, as she might have calmed some fevered
patient.

"May I finish what Stephen tried to tell you, my lady?" she crooned, still stroking back the
hair. "And may I first tell you that Mr. Felix never went to Africa?"

"Oh, but he did!" she cried out again. "I know the men he went with. He was disgusted with
the whole business--so he told one of his friends--and never wanted to see me or England again."

"You are sure?"

"Yes, I heard about it in Ostend when--" She did not finish the sentence.

The nurse's free hand now closed on Lady Barbara's thin fingers, with a quiet, compelling softness,
as if preparing her for a shock.

"Mr. Felix--came here--to New York--my lady--and is here now--or was some weeks ago--doing
nothing but walk the streets." The words had come one by one, Martha's clasp tightening as
she spoke.

The wasted figure lifted itself from the pillow and sat bolt upright.

"MARTHA! What do you mean!"

"Yes, right here in New York, my lady."

"It isn't so!" Her hands were now clutching Martha's shoulders. "Tell me it isn't so! It can't
be so!"

"It's the blessed God's truth, every word of it! He and Stephen have been looking for you day
and night."

"Looking for me? Me! Oh, the shame of it, the shame!" Then with sudden fright: "But he must
not find me! He shall not find me! You won't let him find me, will you, Martha?" Her arms were
now tight about the old woman's neck, her agonized face turning wildly toward the door, as
if she thought that Felix were already there. "You don't think he wants to kill me, do you?"
she whispered at last, her face hidden in the nurse's neck.

Martha folded her own strong arms about the shaking woman, warming and comforting her, as she
had warmed and comforted the child. She would go through with it now to the end.

"No, it's not you he wants to kill," she said firmly, when the trembling figure was still.

Lady Barbara loosened her grasp and stared at her companion. "Then what does he want to see
me for?" she asked, in a dazed, distracted tone.

"He wants to help you. He never forgets that you were his wife. He'll have his arms around
you the moment he gets his eyes on you, and all your troubles will be over."

"But I do not want his help and I won't accept his help," she exclaimed, drawing herself up.
"And I won't see him if he comes! You must not let me see him! Promise me you won't! And he
must not find"--she hesitated as if unwilling to pronounce the name--"he must not find Mr.
Dalton. There has been scandal enough. You do not think he wants to find Mr. Dalton, too, do
you, Martha?" she added slowly, as if some new terror were growing on her.

"That's what Stephen thinks--find him and kill him. That's why he wanted you to listen last
night. That's why he wants to get you and Mr. Felix together. Mr. Dalton won't stay here if
he knows Mr. Felix is looking for him. He's too big a coward."

Lady Barbara shivered, drew her gown closer, and sank to the bed again, gazing straight before
her. "Yes, that is what will happen, Martha--he would kill him. I see it all now. That is what
would have happened to our gardener who ruined the gatekeeper's daughter, if the man had not
left England. She was only a girl--hardly grown; yes, it all comes back to me. I remember what
my husband did." She was still speaking under her breath, reciting the story more to herself
than to Martha, her voice rising and falling, at times hardly audible. "Nothing--happened then--because
my husband--did not find the man."

She faced the nurse again. "You won't let him come here, will you, Martha?"

"He'll come, my lady, if Stephen can get hold of him," came the positive reply. "He had a room
in a lodging-house not far from here, but he left it, and Stephen doesn't know where he's gone.
But he'll turn up again down at the shop, and then--" 

The English navy was the pride of that great nation in 1812, as it
is now.

When war with the United States was discussed, the idea that America without a navy, and with but
few if any trained naval officers could cope with England, caused the Briton to smile; but a great
surprise was in store.

The first American victories were on the high seas. Tradition, discipline, ships and training seemed
all of no avail. While the English were carrying everything on land, where it was supposed they
were weakest, they were losing everything on water, where thought to be strongest. Everybody
was surprised.

They supposed the first three or four American victories were accidents; but as success after success
continued to follow the American arms at sea, they were dumfounded.

England's boasted navy had lost its power.

The first naval engagement of any consequence was on August 19, 1812. Captain Hull of the United
States frigate Constitution captured an English frigate, The Guerriere, after a hard fought
battle. The Guerriere had made herself very obnoxious in her way of challenging American vessels.
In this engagement she lost seventy-nine killed and wounded, while the Constitution lost but
thirteen. There were ten impressed Americans on The Guerriere. On the 7th of September, the
United States frigate Essex captured the Alert in a fight of eight minutes. The American sloop-of-war
Wasp, on the 18th of October, encountered the British sloop-of-war Frolic, a much larger and
stronger ship. The fight was terrible, and only three officers and one seaman on the Frolic
remained unhurt; almost a hundred were killed and wounded, while the Americans lost but ten.
The Wasp did not long enjoy her triumph, however. On that same evening the British man-of-war
Poicters, Captain Beresford, captured the Wasp and her prize.

The phrase "Free Trade and Sailors' Rights," borne on the banner at the masthead of the Essex,
soon became the war-cry of the American seaman.

The 25th of October, 1812, one week after the victory and loss of the gallant Wasp, dawned
bright and clear on the English frigate Macedonian sailing westward of Canary Islands. Little
change had come to the Macedonian since Fernando Stevens had been transferred from her to the sloop.
At this time there were but three impressed Americans on the Macedonian,
Sukey, a negro sailor called Tawney and a man named Rogers.

Notwithstanding their difference in race and social standing, Sukey and Tawney were attached to
each other. Both were Americans, and both loved the star-spangled banner.

It was a holy Sabbath morning, and every sailor, according to Captain
Garden's orders, was dressed in his best, when the cry of, "Sail ho!"
rang out from the masthead.

It was ascertained that the stranger was an American, and the ship
was cleared for action.

As the Macedonian bore down on the American--her men at their quarters--Sukey
and Tawney, who happened to be stationed at the quarter-deck battery,
respectfully accosted the captain, as he passed them in his rapid
promenade, his spyglass under his arm.

"Say, look here," said Sukey, "we are not Englishmen; we don't want to be in the game. It's
a bitter thing to lift a hand against the flag of that country which
harbors our parents.

Please release us from this contest and let us remain neutral during the fight; I tell you,
I don't want to be in the game."

When a ship of any nation is running into action, there is no time for argument, small time
for justice, and not much for humanity. Snatching a pistol from the belt of a boarder standing
by, the captain leveled it at the heads of the sailors, and commanded them instantly to their
quarters, under penalty of being shot on the spot. So, side by side with their country's foes,
Sukey, Tawney and Rogers toiled at the guns, and fought out the fight to the last; with the exception
of Rogers who was killed by one of his country's balls.

The conflict was terrible. Sukey was stationed on the gun deck, abreast the mainmast. This part
of the ship they called the slaughter-house, for men fell five and six at a time. An enemy
nearly always directs his shot at this point in order to cut away the mast. The beams and carlines
were spattered with blood and brains. About the hatchways it looked like a butcher's stall;
bits of human flesh were sticking in the ring-bolts.

A pig that ran about the deck, though unharmed, was so covered with
blood, that the sailors threw it overboard, swearing it would be rank
cannibalism to eat it.

A goat, kept on board for her milk, had her legs shot away, and was thrown into the sea.

The sailors who were killed were, according to the usual custom, ordered to be thrown overboard
as soon as they fell; for the sight of so many corpses lying around might appall the survivors
at the guns. A shot entering one of the portholes cut down two-thirds of a gun's crew. The
captain of the next gun, dropping his lock string, which he had just pulled, turned over the
heap of bodies to see who they were; when, perceiving an old messmate, who had sailed with
him in many cruises, he burst into tears, and, taking the corpse up in his arms and going with
it to the side, he held it over the water a moment, gazed on the silent pale face and cried:

"Oh,
God! Tom--Tom, has it come to this at last----"

"D--n your prayers! over with that thing! overboard with it and down to your gun!" roared a wounded
lieutenant. The order was obeyed, and the heart-stricken sailor returned to his post.

At last, having lost her fore and maintopmasts, her mizzenmast having been shot away to the deck,
and her foreyard lying in two pieces on her shattered forecastle, having been hulled in a
hundred places with round shot, the Macedonian was reduced to the last extremity. Captain
Garden ordered his signal quarter-master to strike the flag.

Never did Sukey hear a command with greater joy. Never was a sailor so happy at being defeated.
When the order was given to strike the flag, one of Captain Garden's
officers, a man hated by the seamen for his tyranny, howled the most
terrific remonstrances, and swore he would rather sink alongside than
surrender.

Had he been captain, probably he would have done so.

Sukey and Tawney were among the boat's crew which rowed Captain Garden to the enemy. As, he
touched the deck, Captain Garden saluted his captor, Captain Decatur, and offered him his sword;
but it was courteously declined. The victor remembered the dinner parties he and Captain Garden
had enjoyed in Norfolk, previous to the breaking out of hostilities,
and while both were in command of the very frigates now crippled on
the sea.

The Macedonian had gone into Norfolk with despatches; while Decatur was in that port. Then they
had laughed and joked over their wine, and a wager of a beaver hat was said to have been made between
them upon the event of the hostile meeting of their ships.

This was their next meeting. Sukey and Tawney went home in the American frigate United States.
With Sukey's return to his native country, the reader's interest in the naval operations perhaps
ceases.

Naval battles are the same, bloody and desperate, and the details
of the fight with the Macedonian are the details of all others.

After briefly noticing the principal victories and defeats on sea, we shall take up again
the characters in our story.

On November 22d, the United States brig Vixen was captured by the English frigate Southampton,
and both were subsequently shipwrecked on December 29th, the United States frigate Constitution,
under Commodore Bainbridge, captured the British frigate Java, off
the coast of Brazil.

The American loss was 44 and the British 151. The American victories of the year of 1812 with
such little loss produced much exultation in America and surprise
and mortification in England.

American seamen had been the greatest sufferers at the hands of the
British, and they had long burned to avenge the insults of the English
Navy.

They fought for patriotism, glory and vengeance.

The year 1813 was noted for the continued success of the American Navy. On February 24th, the
Hornet captured the British brig Peacock on the coast of South America. On June 1st, the British
frigate Shannon captured the Chesapeake after a terrible battle,
in which the Americans lost 133 and the British half as many.

Captain Lawrence of the Chesapeake was mortally wounded, and his dying command, "Don't give
up the ship!" has been the motto for many worthy enterprises.

In August, Captain Porter, with the American frigate Essex, cruising
in the Pacific Ocean, captured twelve armed British whalers.

In the same month, the American sloop-of-war Argus, cruising in the
English channel, captured twenty-one British merchantmen, but on the
13th was herself captured by the British man-of-war Pelican after
a severe engagement.

On the 3d of September, the American brig Enterprise captured the
British Boxer off the coast of Maine.

Perry's victory on Lake Erie, which occurred on the 10th of this
month, has already been noticed.

The year 1814 was not a line of unbroken success, though American
victories were many and brilliant.

On the 28th of March, the brilliant career of the United States frigate
Essex, in the Pacific Ocean, was terminated by her capture by two
British war vessels at Valparaiso.

On April 21st, the United States sloop-of-war Frolic was captured
by the British frigate Orpheus.

On the 27th of the same month, the United States sloop-of-war Peacock
captured the British brig-of-war Epervier with $118,000 in specie
on board.

On June 9th, the United States sloop-of-war Rattlesnake was captured by a British man-of-war. This
reverse was followed by the loss of the United States sloop Syren
on the 12th.

On the 28th, the American sloop Wasp captured the British sloop Reindeer, in the British channel.
On the 1st of September, the Wasp captured the British sloop Avon, and after taking three other
prizes, this remarkably successful vessel mysteriously disappeared. Her fate was never known,
though it is supposed she was lost at sea.

On January 15, 1815, the United States frigate President was captured by four English vessels. On the
28th of February, although peace was declared, the United States frigate Constitution captured
two British vessels of war, off the island of Madeira.

In March, the United States frigate Hornet captured the British brig Penguin, off the coast
of Brazil.

The last hostile act at sea took place in the Straits of Sunda, in the East Indies, where the
United States brig-of-war Peacock captured the Nautilus, a British sloop-of-war. The three
American vessels at sea when the war closed each came home crowned
with laurels.

The part taken by the American privateers during the war was considerable and a detailed history
of them would fill a volume larger than this. During the war there were I,750 British vessels captured,
against a loss of I,683 American ships. The spirit and energy of the American seamen, under all
their embarrassments, gave an unmistakable indication of the future greatness of the power of the
United States Navy.

On the first night after Sukey and Terrence joined Fernando, the three sat about the bivouac
fire, while all save the sentries slept, talking over the past which, to Fernando, seemed
like a troubled dream.

"Did either of you ever meet Captain Snipes?" asked Fernando.

"Bad luck to him, I did not," said Terrence. "It's bad it would have fared with the spalpeen
if I had."

At mention of Captain Snipes, there came an expression over Sukey's face which is indescribable.
His face grew pale, and his brow contracted, his teeth set, and his eyes seemed to have the
glitter of steel, while he shrugged his shoulders, as if he again felt the cat-o'-nine-tails about
them.

"Did he never come aboard the Macedonian again?" asked Fernando.

"No."

"Did you hear of him?"

"Yes."

"Where was he?"

"He was transferred to the Xenophon."

"The Xenophon? was not Lieutenant Matson in command of that vessel?"

"For awhile."

"Was he not promoted?"

"No; it seems his affair with you got to England."

"Just in time to spoil a nate little promotion, too," put in Terrence. "I heard all about it
from the captain of the merchantman I captured.

He told me when we were playing poker one night."

Fernando looked sadly into the smouldering bivouac and heaved a sigh.

Almost five years had elapsed since he had seen Morgianna, and he
had not heard a word from her since he left her in the great stone
house on the hill that night,--she laughing at his misery.

After a long silence Fernando asked:

"Is he married?"

"Who?" asked Sukey.

"Faith, the captain's absent minded," put in Terrence.

"I mean Lieutenant Matson."

"Not as I know of."

"Did you see him after we left Mariana?"

"Yes."

"When?"

"Only six days before we were captured by Decatur. We touched at the Canary Islands, and the Xenophon
was there. He came aboard our vessel."

"Did he recognize you?"

"No," Sukey answered. "Had he known me he wouldn't a-talked with a common sailor."

"Was he married then?"

"No; I heard him tell Captain Garden that he was still single."

Fernando heaved another sigh and asked:

"Did he say--did he say anything about her?"

"Who?"

Fernando heaved another sigh and asked:

"Did he say--did he say anything about her?'7

"Who?"

The conversation was not interesting to Terrence and he had gone to another part of the camp, to
engage in a game of cards with a sentry.

"Morgianna," Fernando said.

"Morgianna? no--she is the girl at Mariana, isn't she?"

"Yes."

"I didn't hear him mention her name."

"They are not married yet?"

"No."
"Perhaps I was mistaken after all," said Fernando thoughtfully. "May
be she don't care for him."

Then Fernando sighed again and gazed
into the smouldering fire. After several minutes more, he said:

"Sukey,
she must be in love with him."

"I thought so."

Fernando sighed and
remarked:

"She may have married some one else, though."

"No, she
ain't."

"Have you heard of her?"

"I saw her!" Sukey declared.

"When?"

"When
I was in Baltimore last winter."

"Did you talk with her, Sukey?"

"No."

"Then
how did you know she was not married?"

"When I was in Baltimore last
winter."

"Did you talk with her, Sukey?"

"No."

"Then how did you
know she was not married?"

"I was in a store and overheard two women
who knew her gossiping. One asked the other if Morgianna Lane was
married yet. One said:

"'I thought she would marry the English lieutenant.'

"The
other said:

"'No, not yet. I suppose they are waiting till the war
is over.'

"'Has she no other lover?' asked the other. Then the other
woman said she believed not, at least none ever came to see her."

Fernando
was quite sure she must have lovers by the score. Such a glorious
woman as Morgianna could not but have an abundance to choose from.

"You
saw Morgianna, Sukey, how did she look?"

"Just as when we left. Not
a day older."

"You knew her at sight?"

"Of course; but she didn't
know me. I suspect I was a hard-looking case then; for I had just
come from the ship and had on my English pea-jacket, and my linen
was not the cleanest."

Fernando sat silent for such a long time,
that Sukey, who was tired, nodded awhile in silence, then, rolling
up in his blanket, lay down under a tree and slept. Fernando still
sat gazing into the fire and saying to himself:

"Oh, if it could
have been, if it could have been!"

A young woman does a rash thing
when she rejects such a warm, manly heart as that of Fernando Stevens.
Not all men are capable of such unselfish devotion as his, and Morgianna
little dreamed how much she was casting aside.

He was still gazing
into the smouldering fire, when Terrence, who had won all the money
from the soldier with whom he was playing cards, came to him and said:

"Captain,
are ye goin' to spend the night gazing into the fire?"

"No, Terrence;
I am not sleepy; but I will lie down."

"Captain, do ye remember the
little girl at Mariana five years ago, the one yersilf and the Englishman
were about to break heads over?"

"You mean Morgianna Lane, Terrence?"

"To
be sure I do. I saw the swate craythur not two months since." Fernando,
who was anything but sleepy, asked:

"Where did you see her, Terrence?"

"In
Baltimore. She is prettier than whin you used to stroll over the beach
in the moonlight with her."

"Is she married?"

"Divil a bit. I talked
with her, and, d'ye belave me, almost the first question she asked
me was about yersilf. Aye, Fernando, it was a grand story I told her
about ye making a hero of yersilf. I told her how ye defeated Tecumseh
and killed the thief with yer own hand, and how ye conquered at Chippewa
and Lundy's Lane."

Fernando's heart gave a tremendous bound. Had
she really asked about him? Then she had not forgotten him in five
long years. Could this be true? Terrence had not the strictest regard
for truth, and he might be only telling this out of mischief.

"Terrence,
are you telling me the truth?" he asked.

"Ivery blissid word of it
is the gospel truth, me frind," Terrence answered. "The little girl
still lives at the village beyant Baltimore, and if ye want her, ye
kin win her."

"Terrence, you are trifling with me; Morgianna cares
nothing for me."

"Don't ye belave it. If she didn't, why did she
ask about ye the very first chance she had? Me boy, whin a girl remembers
a fellow after five years, it's some sign. Now if ye want that blushin'
damsel, lave it all to me."

"Terrence, let us go to sleep, we have
a hard march before us to-morrow."

"I take it at yer word, captain."

In
less than ten minutes the light-hearted Irishman was buried in slumber.

CHAPTER
XVII.

THE CRUISER'S THREAT.

Terrence and Sukey both volunteered
to accompany Fernando's detached riflemen in the vigorous campaign
which was before them. Fernando's riflemen now numbered one hundred
and sixty-two, composed mostly of frontiersmen, all dead shots. Sukey
declared that he was in the game and would kill a British officer
for every stripe Captain Snipes had caused to be laid on his shoulders.

"There
were twelve blows, nine stripes each. Nine times twelve are one hundred
and eight."

"And have ye got the job all before ye, Sukey?" asked
Terrence.

"I've commenced. Eight have been blotted out. Only a hundred
remains," Sukey answered solemnly.

No one asked when the eight had
been blotted out, but Fernando knew he must have done it while the
Macedonian was fighting the American frigate. Sailors, driven to desperation,
frequently take advantage of such occasions to wreak vengeance on
cruel officers. The boatswain's mate who had flogged Sukey was found
dead on the gun deck at the close of the fight.

The American forces
were hurried forward to Washington, where everything was in the wildest
confusion. The contemptible Peace Party had done all by way of ridicule
and argument to keep off the war, and were now doing all in their
power to prevent its prosecution. General Winder and Commodore Barney
were in command of the land and naval forces of the United States,
for the defence of Washington. In vain Winder had called on the government
for more troops and supplies.

When Fernando arrived at Washington,
Barney had already blown up his flotilla at Pig Point, and with his
soldiers and marines joined General Winder.

General Ross, the commander
of the British land forces and one of the most active of Wellington's
officers, on finding the American flotilla a smoking ruin, marched
to upper Marlborough with his troops, where a road led directly to
Washington City, leaving Cockburn in charge of the British flotilla.
Winder had but three thousand men, most of them undisciplined, to
oppose this force; and he prudently retreated toward Washington followed
by Ross, who, on the 23d of August, was joined by Cockburn and his
seamen.

Uncertain whether Washington City or Fort Washington was
the destination of the enemy, Winder left a force at Bladensburg about
four miles from the capitol, and with other troops watched the highways
leading in other directions, while he hastened to the city to inform
the president that the enemy were camped in ten miles of the capitol. "Don't promise too much till you hear me out. I am looking
for a job."

Kitty turned quickly, her eyes two round O's, all the ruddiness gone from her cheeks. "Mr.
O'Day! Why! Why!--and what's Otto done to ye? I'll go to him this minute and--"

Felix laughed gently. "You will do nothing of the kind. Mr. Kling is all right and so am I.
I want the job for a tramp who tried to hold me up one night, and who is now scrubbing the
floor in a rather disreputable public house on Third Avenue."

Kitty let out all her breath and brought her plump hands down on her plump knees, her body
rocking as she did so. "Oh, is that it? What a start ye give me! I thought ye and Kling had
quarrelled. Sure, I'll take your tramp if ye say so. We want a man to wash the wagons, and
help Mike clean up. John fired the macaroni we had last month and I didn't blame him. What
can yer man do?"

"Not much."

"What do ye know about him?"

"Nothing, except that he tried to rob me."

"And what do ye want me to take him on for? To have him get away some night with a Saratoga
trunk and--"

"No, to KEEP him from getting away with it. He's been on the ragged edge of life for some months,
if I read him aright, and has all he can do to keep his footing. I found him a while ago by
the merest accident, and he is still holding on. A week with you and your husband will do him
more good than a legacy. He will get a new standard."

"What's he been doin' that he's up against it like this?" she asked, ignoring the compliment.

"Trying to forget a wife who went back on him--so he tells me."

"Has he done it?"

"Yes. If you can believe him. She has become a drunkard."

"Well--that's about the worst thing can happen to a man--if he's telling ye the truth. What's
become of her?"

"He did not say. All I know is that he has not seen her since she went away."

"Maybe he didn't want to," she flashed back. "Did ye get out of him whose fault it was?"

Felix, whose remarks had been addressed to the red-hot coals in the stove, glanced quickly
toward Kitty, but made no answer.

"Ye don't know, that's it, and so ye don't say I'll tell ye that it's the man's fault more'n
half the time."

"And what makes you think so, Mistress Kitty?" he asked, trying to speak casually, not daring
to look at her for fear she would detect the tremor on his lips, wondering all the time at
her interest in the subject.

"It ain't for thinkin', Mr. O'Day, it's just seein' what goes on every day, and it sets me
crazy. If a man's got gumption enough to make a girl love him well enough to marry him, he
ought to know enough to keep it goin' night and day--if he don't want her to forget him. Half
of 'em--poor souls!--are as ignorant as unborn babes, and don't know any more what's comin'
to them than a chicken before its head's cut off. She wakes up some mornin' after they've been
married a year or two and finds her man's gone to work without kissin' her good-by--when he
was nigh crazy before they were married if he didn't get one every ten minutes. The next thing
he does is to stay out half the night, and when she is nigh frightened to death, and tells
him so with her eyes streamin', instead of comfortin' her, he tells her she ought to have better
sense, and why didn't she go to sleep and not worry, that he was of age and could take care
of himself--when all the time she is only lovin' him and pretty near out of her mind lest he
gets hurted. And last he gets to lyin' as to where he HAS been--maybe it's the lodge, or a
game in a back room, or somethin' ye can't talk about--anyhow, he lies about it, and then she
finds it out, and everything comes tumblin' down together, and the pieces are all over the
floor. That runs on for a while, and pretty soon in comes a dandy-lookin' chap and tells her
she's an abused woman--and she HAS been--and he begins pickin' up the scraps and piecin' them
together, tellin' her all the time the pretty things the first man told her and which, fool-like,
she believes over agin, and then one fine day she skips off and the husband goes round, tearin'
his hair with shame or shakin' his fist with rage, and says she broke up his home, and if she
ever sets foot on his doorstep again he'll set the dogs on her, or let her starve before he'd
give her a crumb. Don't it make you laugh? It does me. And you should see 'em swell round and
air their troubles when most everybody knows just what's happened from the beginnin'! If it
was any of my business, I'd let out and tell 'em so.

"What my John knows, I know; and what I know, he knows. There's never been a time, and there
ain't one now, when I'm beat out and my bones are hangin' stiff in me--and I get that way sometimes
even now--that I don't go to John and say, 'John, dear, get yer arms around me and hold me
tight, I'm that tired,' and down goes everything, and he's got my head on his shoulder and
pattin' my cheeks, and up I get all made over new, and him too. That's the way we get on, and
that's the way they all ought to get on if--"

She paused, stretching her neck as if for more air.

"God save me! Will ye hear me run on? And ye sittin' there drinkin' it all in, not known' a
word about the women and carin' less. Ye've got to forgive me, for I'm like John's alarm-clock
in this wife business, and when I'm wound up I keep strikin' until I run down. Whew! What a
heat I got myself into! Now go on, Mr. O'Day. What'll I pay him, and when's he comin?"

Felix waved his hand deprecatingly. "And so you never think, Mistress Kitty, that it may be
the woman's fault?"

"Yes, sometimes it is. Faults on both sides, maybe. If it's the woman's fault, it always begins
when she lets her man do all the work. Look up and down 'The Avenue' here! Every wife is helpin'
her husband in his business, and every wife knows as much about it as the man does. That ain't
the way up around Central Park. Half of 'em ain't out of bed till purty nigh lunch-time. I've
heard 'em all talk; and worse yet, they glory in it. What can ye expect when there ain't five
of 'em to a block who knows whether her husband has made a million in the past year or whether
he's flat broke, except what he tells her? No wonder, when trouble comes, they shift husbands
as they do their petticoats, and try it over again with a new one!"

"And if she takes this last plunge, when will she wake up to her mistake?" asked Felix, in
a low voice.

"Oh, ye can't always tell. It'll generally run on for a while until she starts up and stares
about her like she's been in a trance or a nightmare, and then the dear God help her after
that, for nobody else can--nor will! That's the worst of it--NOR WILL! John was readin' out
to me the other night about the Red Cross Society for pickin' up wounded off the battle-field,
and carryin' them in where they can be patched up again and join their companies when they
get well. Why don't they have a Red Cross for some of the poor girls and wives who are hurted--hundreds
of 'em lyin' all over the lot--and patch 'em up and bring 'em back to their homes? Now I'm done."

"No! Not yet. One more question. After the last nightmare, what?"

"The gutter--or worse--that's what! And when it's all over, most people say: 'Served her right--she
had a happy home once, why didn't she stay in it?' And somebody else says: 'She was always
wild and foolish--I knew her as a girl.' And some don't say a blessed word because they couldn't
dirty their clean lips with her name-the hypocrites!--and so they cart off her poor body and
dump it in a lot back of Calvary cemetery. Oh, I know 'em, and that's what makes me get hot
under the collar every time I get talkin' as I've been to-night!--And now let's quit it. If
yer dead-beat wants a job, and we can keep him from stealin' the tires off the wagon and the
shoes off my big Jim, he can come to work in the mornin', and John will pay him a dollar a
day and he can sleep over the stables. And if he's decent, he can come in here once in a while
and I'll warm him up with a cup of coffee. I'm glad to take him on just because ye want it--and
ye knew that before I said it, for there's nothin' I wouldn't do for ye, and ye know that,
too. Listen! That's John drivin' in, and I'm going out to meet him."

Chapter XVII

To the fears already possessing Lady Barbara a new one had now been added, freezing her blood
and leaving her prostrate and helpless, like a plant stricken by an icy blast.

There had been no sleep for her after Martha's revelations regarding the presence of Felix
in town, and turn as she would on her pillow, she could not escape the dread of one hideous
possibility--her meeting him face to face, uncovering to his penetrating gaze her shame.

That he had had any other purpose in pursuing her across the sea than to humiliate and punish
her, she did not believe. No man, certainly no man as proud as her husband, would forgive a
woman who had trailed his ancestral name in the mud, and made his family life a byword in clubs
and drawing-rooms. That Martha believed he could still love her was natural. Such good souls,
women of the people, who had always led restrained and wholesome lives, would believe nothing
else, but not a woman of her own class. She had only to recall a dozen instances where the
bonds of marriage had been broken, with all the attendant scandal and misery, to be convinced
of what would befall her were she and Felix to meet.

Her one hope was that her husband, baffled in his search, had left the city, and that neither
Martha nor Stephen would ever see him again. Their inability to find him of late might mean
that he had given up the search, having found no trace of her during all the months in which
he had been trying to find her. Or it might mean that he, too, had succumbed to the same poverty
which she had endured and, being no longer able to maintain himself in the great city, had
sought work elsewhere.

As the thought of this last possibility suddenly took possession of her, her heart gave a great
bound of relief, and in the quiet that ensued, a certain tenderness for the man whom she had
wronged began to well up within her. She recalled their early life and his unfailing generosity.
Never in all the years she had known him had he refused her the slightest thing which could,
in any way, add to her happiness. Indeed, he had often denied himself many of the luxuries
to which a man of his tastes and training was entitled, in order to add to her store. Nor had
he ever restrained her in her whims or her extravagance, and never, in any way, had he curtailed
her freedom. She had been free to come and free to go, and with whom she pleased. Her intimacy
with Dalton had been proof of all this, as well as her friendships with various men to whose
companionship many another husband might have objected. "All right, Barbara," was his invariable
reply; "you will get over your youth one of these days, and then you and I will settle down."

Even when the financial crash had come, he had begged her to go with him to Australia, where
he had important family connections, and where he could build up his fortunes anew. It was
by no means certain, he had told her, that he was entirely ruined. His father's estate, when
all the debts were paid, might still leave a surplus. There was some land just outside of London,
too, on the line of suburban improvement, and this, with the title which had come to him with
his father's death, would doubtless, after a few years, enable them to return to England and
resume their former position. She remembered very well the night he had pleaded with her, and
she remembered, too, with a gripping at her heart, her own contemptuous answer, and her departure
the next morning for her father's roof. And then the lie she had told!--that Felix had bluntly
announced to her his plan for raising sheep in Australia, ordering her to get ready to go with
him at once.

She recalled, too, this time with burning cheeks, a certain unsigned letter, in an unknown
hand, which had reached her after her flight with Dalton, describing her husband as stunned
and dazed by the blow, the writer denouncing her for her desertion, and warning her of the
retribution in store for her if she remained with a man like the one on whom she had staked
her future happiness. She had laughed at its contents and tossed it across the table to Dalton,
who had read it with a smile, caught it between a pair of tongs and, lighting a match, held
it over the flame until it was consumed.

Then--as, tortured by these recollections, she lay staring at the dark--Martha's prediction,
based on Stephen's, belief, that Felix would kill Dalton at sight, rose up in her mind, and
with it came another great fear--one that, for a moment, stopped her heart from beating and
left her numb. In the quick succession of blows that Martha had dealt, she had not fully grasped
this part of the story. Now she did. That her husband was capable of it she fully believed.
Quiet, reticent men like Felix--men who had served their country both in India and Egypt--men
who never boasted, who never discussed their intentions or plans until they were carried out,
were the men to take the law into their own hands when their honor was involved, no matter
who was hurt. Such a catastrophe would not only bring to light her own misery, but the unavoidable
publicity would tarnish still further the good name of her people at home. Even were only an
attempt on Dalton's life made, and an official investigation held--as she was convinced would
be the case--the scandal would be almost as bad. Rather than have this occur she would make
any sacrifice, even that of humiliating herself on her knees before Felix--begging his forgiveness,
not for the sake of the man she now feared and detested, but for the sake of her father at
home, and to shield her own identity. She feared, too, for Felix. He, of all men, should be
saved from committing such an act.

With this a sudden resolve born of her fears and shattered nerves took possession of her. She
would not only see her husband whenever he came, but she would send word in the morning to
Stephen to redouble his search, leaving no stone unturned until he was found.

Nothing of all this did she say to Martha, who helped her dress, watching the dark circles
beneath the eyes. Breakfast over, she silently took her seat by the window, drew from the big
paper box at her feet her several pieces of lace, including the mantilla, and began to work.

As she held up to the light the ragged tear in the Spanish lace, and noted the width and length
of the gash in its delicate texture, her heart sank. She saw at a glance that she could not
finish it before closing time, even if she devoted the whole day to its repair. Better complete,
thought she, the other and smaller pieces--one a fichu of Brussels lace, and the others some
embroidered handkerchiefs on which she was to place monograms. These she would finish and take
to Mangan. When he saw how tired she was, he would accept her excuses and give her another
day for the large and more important piece. She did not have to leave the house until four
o'clock, and as Martha was to be out most of the day, she could work on without distraction
of any kind.

When, at noon, Martha left her, with a caressing pat of the hand, promising to be back in time
for supper, the anxious, weary woman picked up her needle again, her fingers darting in and
out like shuttles, her shoulders aching with the strain, her mind still intent on the problems
which had tortured her all night, and only rousing herself when the clock in a neighboring
tower struck four. Then she gathered up her work, wrapped the whole in the same sheet of tissue-paper
in which the several pieces had been packed, and, adjusting her hat and cloak, started for
Rosenthal's.

Mangan, who was in charge of the department, had been waiting for her in a small room off the
repair shop, and as he caught sight of her frail figure making her way toward him, rose to
greet her. "Well, I'm glad you've come," he began, as she reached his desk. "Brought that Spanish
piece, didn't you? Ought to have had it last night."

She tried to smile, but his face was too forbidding. "No, I am sorry to say that--"

"You didn't! What have you done with it?"

"I could not finish it. I have brought everything else. I will have it for you in the morning."

Mangan looked at her curiously, a smirk of suspicion crossing his narrow fox face. "Oh! You'll
bring it to-morrow, will you?" he sneered. "Well, do you know that to-morrow's New Year's Eve
and that this mantilla's got to be delivered to-night? I derected Shields Collins Shannon and the
two fieldses to proceed on in the two small Canoes to the Ponia Island
and hunt on that Island untill we came on, they Set out before day
light The Skirt of timber in the bend above the Chyenne is not very
Considerable the timber is Scattered from 4 to 16 miles on the S W
Side of the river, and the thickest part is at the distance of 6 &
10 miles from the Chyenne, a narrow bottom of Small Cotton trees is
also on the N E pt. at the distance of from 4 to 41/2 miles above
the Chyenne imediately at the enterance of that river I observe but
fiew large trees Some Small Growth and willows on the lower Side bottom
on the Missouri about 1/2 a mile and extends up the Chyen 1 mile about
a quarter of a mile above is a 2d bottom of Cotton timber, in the
point above the Chyenne there is a considerable bottom of about 2
miles on that river and a large timbered bottom a Short distance above.
at 8 A.M. we Came to at the mouth of the Chyenne to delay untill 12
to make a meridian observation and derected 3 hunters to proced up
this river and hunt its bottoms untill twelve at which hou we Shall
proceed on. the hunters returned with 2 deer the Chyenne discharges
but little water which is much the colour of the missouri tho not
So muddy I observe a very eligable Situation on the bank of the Chyenne
on it's lower Side about 100 paces from it's enterance. this Situation
is above the high floods and has a perfect Command of each river we
obtained a Meridian altitude with the Sextt. and artificial Horizon
112° 50' 00"- after which we proceeded on passed the pania Island
and came up with Shields and Collins they had killed two deer only
at 3 P M we passed the place where we Saw the last encampement of
Troubleson Tetons below the old ponia village on the S W Side. a very
large timbered bottom on the N. E. Side imedialely below the Pania
Island.

Latd. of Chyenne is North. at Sunset we landed about the Center of a large bottom on the N E
Side a little below the enterance of No timber Creek and below our Encampment of 29th of Septr.
1804. dreyer killed a deer after we encamped. a little above our
encampmt. the ricaras had formerly a large village on each Side which
was destroyed by the Seioux. there is the remains of 5 other villages
on the S W. Side below the Chyenne river and one on Le ho catts Isld.
all those villages have been broken up by the Seioux.

This day proved a fine Still day and the men played their oars and we made 48 miles to day. The
2 fields and Shannon did not join this evening which caused me to encamp earlier than usial
for them. we Saw no game on the plains today. the Tetons have been
on the river not long Since

[Clark, August 26, 1806] Tuesday 26th
of August 1806 a heavy dew this morning the hunters or Shannon & the
2 fields came up at Sunrise and we Set out, they had killed only 2
Small deer one of which they had eat at 8 passed the place the Tetons
were encamped at the time they attempted to Stop us in Septr.

 One after another the several objects passed in
review--the kettle singing on the stove, its ample bed of coals warming the room; her own tiny
chamber, leading out of the one large room, with its small iron bedstead and white cotton quilt;
the table with its lamp; the pine shelves with the few pieces of china, and even the big paper
box in which her work was delivered and later returned to the shop, either by wagon or special
messenger, and which Martha, before she had gone out, had placed on a chair near the door to
keep it out of the dust. All told her of peace and warmth and comfort.

She lighted the lamp, picked up the box containing the mantilla, and half raised the lid, intending
to place the contents on her sewing-table, but, catching sight of the kettle again, she let
the box lid drop from her hands. She was chilled from the ride in the car, the water was boiling,
and it would take but a minute to make herself a cup of tea. This would give her renewed strength
for her task. Hardly had she drained her cup when she became conscious of a step on the stairs--a
steady, firm step. Not Martha's nor that of the boy. Nor that of the expressman who often sought
Martha's apartment.

As it approached the landing, a sickening faintness assailed her.

She had heard that step before.

It was Felix!

Her hour of trial had come!

He would find the door ajar, stride into the room with that quiet, self-contained manner of
his; and she must face him and stand ashamed!

For a brief instant she wavered, her resolution of the morning, to throw herself at his feet,
put to flight by a sense of some impending terror. Should she spring forward and shut the door
before he reached it, refusing to admit him until Martha came, or should she creep noiselessly
into her room and lock herself in, remaining silent until he should leave the premises, believing
no one at home? While she stood, half paralyzed with fear, the door moved gently, almost stealthily,
swinging back half its width, and a man in cape-coat, and slouch hat drawn dose over his eyes,
stepped into the room.

Lady Barbara gave a piercing shriek, sprang from her seat, and staggered back, grasping a chair
to keep her from falling. "How dare you, Guy Dalton, to--"

The intruder loosened the top button of his cape, watching, meanwhile, the terrified woman,
and, with a sneer, said: "Oh, stop that, will you? I've had enough of it. You thought you could
get away, did you? Well, you can't, and the sooner you find that out the better for you." He
glanced coolly around the room. "So this is where you are, is it?--a rotten hole, anyhow. You
might better have stayed where you were. Does Rosenthal pay you enough to keep this up, or
is somebody else footing the bills? Now, you get your things on and be quick about it."

She had been edging toward her bedroom door all this time, her eyes glaring into his with the
fierceness of a cornered animal, muttering as she stepped--one word at a time:

"You--have--no--right--to--come--in--here."

"I haven't, haven't I? I'd like to know who has a better right?" he returned angrily.

"No, you have not." She was moving an inch at a time, keeping a chair between herself and Dalton,
her eyes watching his every expression, her right hand stretched along the wall.

"Still at it, are you? Well, get through, and hurry up. I'll go where I please, and you'll
come when I want you. Everybody is inquiring for you down at the house, and I promised them
you would be back to-night, and you will. You were a fool to leave. It's a lot better than
this. From what I heard last night, from one of Rosenthal's girls, I thought you had moved
into something palatial."

She had reached the bedroom door now, and her hand was on the knob.

"Yes--that's right," he said, mistaking her purpose, "get into your wraps, and--"

The door closed with a sudden bang, and the inside bolt was pushed tight.

Dalton stood with his hands in his pockets. "Oh, that's the game, is it?" he called, in a loud
voice. He saw he had been outwitted, and an oath escaped him. He saw, too, that the door was
a heavy one, and the effort to force it might bring in the neighbors. "Well, there's no hurry.
I can wait," he added savagely, "but if you know what's good for you, you'll come out now."

She had sunk down on her bed, hardly daring to breathe. Her only hope now lay in Martha, and
she might not come back for an hour.

Dalton sauntered away from the door and began an inspection of the room. The box on the chair
came first. He lifted the lid and drew out the mantilla. "Rather good, this--wonder how she
got hold of it--Oh, yes, I see, she must be repairing it. There are her work-basket and the
spools of black silk."

He turned to the box again and read the name of "Rosenthal" stencilled on the bottom. "So that
is what she is doing--they did not tell me what she worked at." He spread out the mantilla
again and looked it over carefully. Then a smile of cunning crossed his face. "Just what I
want," he said, folding it up and tucking it inside his capacious cape.

He now made a tour of the room, his tread like that of a cat, lifted the plates on the dresser
as if in search of something behind them, rummaged through the work-basket, opening and turning
the leaves of a book lying on the table. So occupied was he that he did not hear Martha's noiseless
step nor know that she had entered the room.

For a moment she stood watching his every movement. The man she saw was well-knit and rather
handsome, not much over thirty, with clean-shaven face, drooping eyelids, and a hard-set lower
jaw. She had a suspicion that it might be Dalton, but was not sure, never having seen him but
once, when he was much younger.

"Who do you want to see?" she asked at last, in a firm voice.

Dalton wheeled sharply, and took her in with one comprehensive glance. He had always prided
himself on never having been outwitted or taken unawares, and that Lady Barbara could lock
herself in her room, and that this woman could creep up behind him unobserved, rather nettled him.

"I don't know that it is any of your business, my good woman," he answered, his insolence increasing
as he noticed how mild and inoffensive she appeared to be; "but if it makes any difference
to you, I will tell you that I am waiting for my wife."

"Where is she?" Martha's voice was clear and incisive, with a ring of determination through
it that, for the moment, disconcerted him.

Dalton pointed to the bedroom door.

Martha stepped across the room and tried the knob. "Open the door, Lady Barbara. According to the
old sailor's account, the fair English maid's name was Mary.

Her father was one of the wealthiest merchants in the city; and one day when Lane was only
nineteen he met Mary. Her beauty captivated him and inspired him to a nobler life.


"Oh, it's Mr. Guy Dalton, is it?" Martha cried, facing him. "The man who's been a curse to
you ever since you met him. I know every crook and turn of you--you ought to be ashamed of
yourself to treat a woman as you have treated Lady Barbara O'Day. Now, sir, this is my room
and you can't stay in it a minute longer. There's the door!"

Dalton laughed a dry, crackling laugh. "You are a regular virago, are you not, my dear woman?"
he said. "Quite refreshing to hear your defense of a woman on whom I have spent every shilling
I had. Now, do not get excited--cool down a bit, and we will talk it over--and while we are
at it, please make me a cup of tea. It is about my hour. When my wife comes to her senses,
as she will in a minute, she will get over her tantrums and think better of it."

Martha strode straight toward him until her capacious body was within a few inches of his shirt-front,
her hands tightly clinched. "Don't make any mistake, Mr. Dalton. Your airs won't go here. My
brother Stephen looks after me and after Lady O'Day, and he and another man you wouldn't care
to meet are looking after you."

She called to her mistress: "Lock and bolt that door on you, and don't open it until I tell you."

Again she confronted Dalton, her contempt for him increasing as she caught the wave of anxiety
that swept his face at her reference to the men who would help her. "Now, you can have just
one minute to leave this room, Mr. Dalton," she cried, throwing back the door. "If you're over
that time, the policeman on the block will help you down-stairs."

Dalton hesitated. The allusion to Stephen, whoever he might be, and to the other man, disturbed
him. That the woman knew more of his history than she was willing at that time to tell was
evident. That she was entirely in earnest, and meant what she said, and that it would be more
than dangerous for him to defy her, should she appeal to the police for help, were equally evident.

"Of course, my dear woman," he said, with assumed humility, his eyes glistening with anger,
"if you do not want me to stay, I suppose I shall have to go. I did not come to make any fuss;
I only came to take my wife home where I can take care of her. She seems to think she can get
along without me. All right--I am willing she should try it for a while. She has my address,
which is more than I had when she left me without a word of any kind."

He slid his hand under his cape to assure himself that the mantilla was safe and out of sight,
picked up his hat, and stepped jauntily out, saying as he went down the staircase: "Next time,
she will come to me. Do you hear? Tell her so, will you?"

Chapter XVIII

Sometimes on life's highway we meet a man who reminds us of one of those high-priced pears
seen in fruiterers' windows: wholesome, good to look at, without a speck or stain on their
smooth, round, rosy skins--until we bite into them. Then, close to their hearts, we uncover
a greedy, conscienceless worm, gnawing away in the dark--and consign the whole to the waste-barrel.

Dalton, despite his alluring exterior, had been rotten at heart from the time he was sixteen
years of age, when he had lied to his father about his school remittances, which the old man
had duplicated at once.

That none of his associates had discovered this was owing to the fact that no one had probed
deeper than the skin of his attractiveness--and with good reason: it was clean, good to look
at, bright in color, a most welcome addition to any dinner-table. But when the drop came--and
very few fruits can stand being bumped on the sidewalk--the revelation followed all the quicker,
simply because bruised fruit rots in a day, as even the least qualified among us can tell.

And the bruises showed clearer as time went on. The lines in his once well-rounded, almost
boyish face grew deeper and more strongly marked, the eyes shrank far back beneath the brows,
the lips became thinner and less mobile, the hair was streaked with gray, and the feet lacked
their old-time spring.

With these there had come other changes. The smile which had won many a woman was replaced
by a self-conscious smirk; the debonair manner which had charmed all who met him was now a
mere bravado. His dress, too, showed the strain. While his collar and neckwear were properly
looked after, and his face was clean-shaven, other parts of his make-up, especially his shoes
and hat, were much the worse for wear.

This, then, was the man who, with thoughts intent on his last and most degrading makeshift,
was forging his way up Second Avenue, the mantilla--the veriest film of old Salamanca lace--pressed
into a small wad and stuffed in his inside pocket. 

I never tried it, and I don't want to."

"It will be a short voyage."

"Short, yes, but long enough to make me sick.

I don't want to be in the game. I am not a water dog. Keep me on the dry land, and I'm all right."

But
Fernando knew that a journey by land would take much longer than by sea. Terrence Malone came to
see them that evening and informed them that the schooner would sail next day. He was a jolly
young fellow and had so many droll stories and jokes, that he kept his companions in a roar
of laughter. One joke followed another in such rapid succession that the youngsters had scarce done
laughing at one, before he fired another at them.

"Baltimore is the most wonderful city in the world, barin Cork," the fair-haired son of the Emerald
Isle declared. "There you find gallant gintlemen and the prettiest girls on earth. Ah! if you
could but see my Kitty Malone! She's a beauty, just a trifle older than mesilf, but every
inch a darlint. Her head is red, her face a trifle freckled, her body's so stout that the girt of
a mule wouldn't encircle her waist," and here Terrence winked, "She plays on the wash-board an illigant
tune, for which she charges a half a dime a garment."

"Did you ever meet with such a jolly fellow?" laughed Fernando when he was gone.

"No," Sukey answered. "He has made my sides ache."
Next day found the westerners on board the schooner sailing out from
the harbor of New York. The skipper was half tipsy, his crew insubordinate,
and for awhile no one seemed to know or care whither they went. The
captain had such frequent recourse to his demijohn, that it was evident
that he would soon be wholly unfit for duty. At last Terrence declared
he would have to take matters in hand himself.

The sea was rough,
and both Fernando and Sukey were too sick to leave their bunks long
at the time.

"Jist ye lie still there, like a darlint, and lave the
skipper to me," said Terrence to Fernando. "Not another divil of a
drop shall he have, until we are safe in Baltimore." If she relented, he would destroy
the ticket and let the matter drop; if she continued obstinate, he would charge her companion
with being an accessory. The woman was evidently befriending Lady Barbara for what she could
get out of her. Neither of them was seeking trouble. Between the two he could accomplish his
purpose.

What would happen in the meanwhile, when she tried to account for its loss to Rosenthal, never
caused him the slightest concern. She, of course, could concoct some story which they would
finally believe. If not, they could deduct the value of the lace from her earnings.

He had the best of motives for his action. Their board bill was overdue. He was harassed by
the want of even the small sums of money needed for car-fare, and of late it had become very
evident that if they were to keep their present quarters--and he was afraid to try for any
others--he must yield at once to the proprietor's pressing suggestion to "patch up his differences
with his wife," and have her come home and once more take charge of the suite of rooms; the
owner arguing that as Mr. and Mrs. Stanton were known to be "family people," a profitable little
game free from police interruption might be carried on, the surplus to be divided between the
"house and Mrs. Stanton's husband."

That she should decline again to be party to any such plan seemed to him altogether improbable,
since all she had to do to insure them both comfort was to return home like a sensible woman,
put on the best clothes she possessed--the more attractive the better, and she certainly was
fetching in that wrapper--and be reasonably polite to such of his friends as chose to drop
in evenings for a quiet game of cards.

Moreover, she owed him something. He had made every sacrifice for her, shared with her his
every shilling, making himself an exile, if not a fugitive, for her sake, and it was time she
recognized it.

With the recall of these incidents in his checkered career a new thought blazed up in his mind--rather
a blinding thought. As its rays brightened he halted in his course, and stood gazing across
the street as if uncertain as to his next move. Perhaps, after all, it would be best NOT to
pawn the mantilla. An outright sale would be much better. If this were impossible, it would
be just as well to destroy the ticket and postpone his scheme for regaining possession of her
person. While something certainly was due him--and she of all women in the world should supply
it--forcing her to carry out the landlord's plan, now that he thought it over, might result
in a certain kind of publicity, which, if his own antecedents were looked into, would be particularly
embarrassing. She might--and here a slight shiver passed through him--she might, in her obstinacy,
threaten him with the forged certificates, a result hardly possible, for no letters of any
kind had reached her, none so far as he knew; neither had he ever discussed the incident with
her, for the simple reason that women, as a rule, never understood such things. And yet how
could he, as a financier, have tided over an accounting which, if allowed to go on, would have
wiped out the savings of hundreds who had trusted him and whom he could not desert in their
hour of need, except by some such desperate means? It would kill our mothers."

"No; I think they would get over it; but I tell you, Fernando, my
opinion is, it don't make much difference."

"Why?"

"The United States and England are going to fight. I got a paper last night, and it was chock full
of fight, and as for your shootin' the lieutenant, I am sure everybody, even your mother and the faculty,
will be glad of it. I only blame you for one thing."

"What is that, Sukey?"

"When you had such a good chance, why didn't you aim higher?"

The expression on Sukey's face was too ludicrous for even the young
duelist, and he laughed in spite of himself.

"Helloa, there's the town," cried Sukey, as they rounded a headland and entered the mouth of a broad
bay, standing in toward a beautiful village. This village has wholly disappeared. Railroads shunned
it, and the water traffic being too small to support it, it degenerated
into a village of fishermen, which, in 1837, was totally destroyed
by fire, and has never been rebuilt.

Before the war of 1812, it was a neat, flourishing little town.

"Is this the town you were spakin' about?" asked Terrence of the boatman.

"Yes, zur."

"What place is it?"

"Mariana."

"Mariana," repeated Fernando, "I have heard that name before.

Where was it? Mariana,--Mariana."

Terrence came forward to his companions and said:

"Now, lads, like as not the frinds of Matson may be afther following
us.

Lave it all to me. We'll change our names and go up to the tavern, where we'll hire rooms and be
gintlemen traveling for pleasure."

"Would they dare follow us on shore?"

"No; I think not; but if they should, my plan will answer."
When they ran into shore, Terrence paid the boatman and discharged
him. Terrence was the son of a rich Irish merchant in Philadelphia,
who kept his son liberally supplied with money, who, with corresponding
liberality, spent it.

Terrence felt that this was his scrape, and
he resolved to bear the expenses.

With his friends, he went to the
tavern, where they engaged rooms. Fernando and Sukey retired to their
rooms, while Terrence remained in the tap-room, where there was a
crowd of Marylanders. He began telling them a most horrible story
of the impressment of himself and his friends by a British vessel
and of their recent escape. He stated that they had been closely pursued,
and he would not be surprised if the Britishers sent a boat on shore
to take them away.

He could not have chosen a better theme to inflame
those Marylanders. One tall, raw-boned man, who carried a rifle and
bullet pouch with him, said:

"Boys, that reminds us mightily o' Dick
Long."

Every Marylander assembled in the tap-room knew the sad story
of poor Dick Long. He was a fisherman with a wife and four children
and was loved by all who knew him. Dick was honest and peaceable,
kind-hearted and brave. One day his fishing smack was driven by a
gale some distance out at sea, when a British cruiser captured him,
and he was impressed into his majesty's service. Dick managed after
many weary months to get a letter to his wife. At Halifax, he tried
to desert, was caught, brought back and lashed to the "long tom" and
received a flogging with the cat-o'-nine-tails. He struck the cruel
boatsman, and was lashed to the mast and flogged until he died. A
deserter from the ship brought home his dying words, which were these:
"Tell my American brothers to avenge me."

"Remember Dick Long, boys,
and ef they come to Mariana, let us make 'em wish they had stayed
away."

The artful Terrence kindled the flame, and a short time after
sunset, Fernando and Sukey were awakened from a doze by hearing a
wild uproar on the streets. They sprang to their feet and ran to the
window.
Looked at from behind, Blobbs was all shirt-sleeves and waist-coat, the back of his flat head
resting like a lid on his shoulders. Looked at from the front, Blobbs developed into a person
with shoe-brush whiskers bristling against two yellow cheeks, the features being the five dots
a child always insists upon when drawing a face. Dalton saw at a glance that it was Mrs. Blobbs,
and not Mr. Blobbs, who was in charge of the shop, and that any discussions with him as to
the price would be useless.

"You're an Hinglishnan, I take it," came from the lowest dot of the five, a blurred and uncertain
mouth.

Dalton colored slightly and nodded.

"Well, what I should adwise ye to do is to take this 'ere lace to some of them hold furnitoor
shops. I know what this is. I 'ate to see a chap like ye put to it like this, that's why I
tell ye. 'Ard on your woman, but--there's a shop hup on Fourth Avenue where they buy such things.
A Dutchman by the name of Kling, right on the corner--you can't miss it. Take it hup to 'im
and tell 'im I sent ye--we often 'elps one another."

Dalton crumpled up the black wad, slid the package under his coat, and without a word of thanks
left the shop.

This was not the first time Blobbs had sent Kling a customer. Indeed, there had always been
more or less of a trade between the two establishments. For, while Mrs. Blobbs had a license
and could advance money at reasonable rates, her principal business was in old-clothes and
ready-to-wear finery. Being near "The Avenue" and well known to its denizens, many of their
outgrown and out-of-fashion garments had passed across her counter. Here the young man who
pounded away on Masie's piano, the night of her birthday party, borrowed, for a trifle, his
evening suit. Here Codman had exchanged a three-year-old overcoat, which refused to be buttoned
across his constantly increasing girth, for enough money to pay for the velvet cuffs and collar
of the new one purchased on Sixth Avenue. Here Mrs. Codman bought remnants of finery with which
to adorn her young daughter's skirts when she went to the ball given by the Washington chowder
party. Here, too, was where the undertaker sold the clothes of the man who stepped off a ten-story
building in the morning and was laid out that same night in Digwell's back room, his friends
depositing a fresh suit for him to be buried in, telling the undertaker to do with the old
one as he pleased. And to this old-clothes shop flocked many another denizen of side streets,
who at one time or another had reached crises in their careers which nothing else could relieve.

Mrs. Blobbs's curt refusal to receive the lace only added fuel to the blazing thought that
had flared up in Dalton's mind when he recalled the certificates. Holding on to them had caused
one explosion. The mantilla might prove another such bomb. He dared not leave it at home and
he could not carry it for an indefinite time on his person. If the man Kling would pay any
decent price for it, he could have it and welcome.

With the grim spectre still linking arms with him he hurried on, making short-cuts across the
streets, until he arrived at Kling's corner. At this point he paused. His terror must not betray
him. Shaking himself free of the spectre, he assumed his one-time nonchalant air, entered the
store and walked down the middle aisle, between the lines of sideboards, bureaus and high desks
drawn up in dress parade. Over the barricade of the small office he caught the shine of Otto's
bald head, the only other live occupant, except Fudge, who had crept out from behind a bureau,
and bounded back with a growl. Fudge had sniffed around the legs of a good many people, and
might have written their biographies, but Dalton was new to him. Few thieves had ever entered
Kling's doors.

"I have just left your old friends, Mr. and Mrs. Blobbs," he began gayly, "who have advised
me to bring to you rather a rare piece of lace belonging to my wife. Fine, isn't it?" He loosened
the bundle and shook out the folds of the mantilla.

Otto put on his glasses, felt the texture of the piece between his fingers, and spread out
the pattern for closer examination. "Yes, dot's a good piece of lace. Vot you vant to do vid
it? Dere's a hole in it, you see," and he thrust a pudgy finger into the gash.

"Yes, I know," returned Dalton, who, with his eye still on the dog, had been crushing it together
so that the tear might not show; "but that is easily remedied. I want to sell it. Mr. Blobbs
tells me it is worth a hundred dollars."

"Is dot so? Vell--vell--a hundred tollars! Dot's a good deal of money." He had begun to wrap
it up, tucking in the ends. "No--dot Fudge dog don't bite--go away, you. T'ank you for lettin'
me see it, tell Mr. Blobbs, but I don't vant it at dot price. And I doan know I vant it at
any price. Dey doan buy dem t'ings any more."

Dalton saw that the mantilla had favorably impressed the dealer. He had caught the look of
pleasure when the lace was first unrolled, reading the man's brain as he had often read the
brains of the men at home who listened to some rose-colored prospectus. These experiences had
taught him that there was always a supreme moment when one must stop praising an article for
sale, whether it were a rubber concession from an African chief or a pound of tea over a grocer's
counter. This moment had arrived with Kling.

"I agree with you," he said smilingly. "The valuation was Mr. Blobbs's, not mine. I told him
I should be glad to get half that amount--or even less."

Otto took the bundle and loosened the roll again. "I got a little girl, Beesving--dot was her
dog make such foolishness--who likes dese t'ings. But dot is not business, for I doan sell
it again once I gif it to her. I joost put it around her shoulders for a New Year's gift. Maybe
if you--" He re-examined it closely, especially the tear, which had partly yielded to Lady
Barbara's deft fingers and tired eyes. "Vell, I tell you vot I do, I gif you tventy tollars."

"That, I am afraid, will not answer my purpose," said Dalton. "Perhaps, however, you will loan
me thirty dollars on it and hold the lace for a week or so, and I will pay you back thirty-five
when some money that is due me comes in?"

Otto looked at him from under his bushy eyebrows. "Ve don't do dot kind of business. If I buy--I
buy. If I sell--I sell. Sometimes I pay more as a t'ing is vorth. Sometimes I pay less. I have
a expert vid me who knows vat dis is vorth, but he is busy vid a customer on de next floor,
and I doan sent for him. If you vant de tventy tollars you can have it. If you doan, den take
avay de lace. I got a lot of t'ings to do more as to talk about it. Ven you see Blobbs, you
tell him vat I say."

Dalton's mind worked rapidly. To take the money would clean off his debt and leave him a margin
which he might treble before midnight.

"Give me the money," he said. "It is not one-third of its value, but I see that it is all I
can do."

Otto smiled--the smile of a man who had hit the thing at which he aimed--felt in his inside
pocket, drew out a great flat pocketbook, and counted out the bills.

Dalton swept them up as a winner at baccarat sweeps up his coin, apparently without counting
them, stuffed the crumpled bank-notes into his pocket, and started for the door.

Half-way down the long shop he halted opposite a sideboard laden with old silver and glass
and, to show that he was not in a hurry, paused for an instant, picking up a cut-glass decanter
with a silver top, remarking casually, as he laid it back, "Like one I have at home," continuing
his inspection by holding aloft a pipe-stem glass, to see the color the better.

As he resumed his walk to the door, Felix, with Masie and a customer ahead of him, was just
descending the rear stairs from the "banquet hall" above. He thus had a full view of the store
below. Something in the way with which the bubble-blown glass was handled attracted O'Day's
attention. He had seen a wrist with a movement like that, the poised glass firmly held in an
outstretched hand. Where, he could not tell; at his own table, perhaps, or possibly at a club
dinner. He remembered the quick, upward toss, the slender receptacle held high. He leaned far
forward, and watched the nervous step and halting gait. Had Masie and the customer not been
ahead of him, he would have hurried past them and called to the man to stop--not an unusual
thing with him when his suspicions were aroused. Instead, he waited until he was well down
the stairs, then strolled carelessly toward the door, intending to make some excuse to accost
the man on the sidewalk. Not that he had any definite conviction regarding his likeness to
the man he wanted; more to satisfy his conscience that he had permitted no clew to slip past him.

What made him hesitate was the way the slouch-hat shaded the intruder's face, the gas-jets
not revealing the features. Only the end of the chin was visible, and the round of the lower
cheek showing above the heavy cape-collar of the overcoat.

Dalton by this time had reached the street-door, which he closed gently behind him, holding
it for an instant to prevent its making a noise. Felix lunged forward, reopened it quickly,
and gazed out into the night. Dalton had vanished as completely as if the earth had swallowed him. 

The Indians appear well Satisfyed with the party and mode of proceedure. we decended only 10 miles to
day Saw Some Elk and buffalow on the Shore near where we Encamped. the Elk beginning to run.
the Buffalow are done running & the bulls are pore.

[Clark, August 20, 1806] Wednesday 20th of August 1806 a violent hard
rain about day light this morning. all wet except myself and the indians.
we embarked a little after Sun rise wind moderate and ahead. we proceeded
on at meridn. passed the enterance of Cannonball river imediately
above is the remains of a large Sieoux encampment which appears to
have been made this Spring. at 3 P M passed the enterance of Wardepon
River Saw great number of wolves on the bank Some Buffalow & Elk,
tho not so abundant as near the River Rochejhone. passed the place
where we left the last encampment of Ricaras in the fall 1804 and
encamped on a Sandbar from the N. E. Side, having made 8 miles only,
the wind blew hard all day which caused the waves to rise high and
flack over into the Small Canoes in Such a manner as to employ one
hand in throwing the water out.

The plains begin to Change their appearance the grass is turning
of a yellow colour.

I observe a great alteration in the Corrent course and appearance of this pt. of the Missouri.
in places where there was Sand bars in the fall 1804 at this time
the main Current passes, and where the current then passed is now
a Sand bar Sand bars which were then naked are now covered with willow
Several feet high. the enteranc of Some of the Rivers & Creeks Changed
owing to the mud thrown into them, and a layor of mud over Some of
the bottoms of 8 inches thick.

[Clark, August 21, 1806] Thursday 21st August 1806 Musquetors very
troublesom in the early part of last night and again this morning
I directed Sergt.

Ordway to proceed on to where there was Some ash and get enough for two ores which were wanting.
Men all put their arms in perfect order and we Set out at 5 a.m.
over took Sergt. ordway with wood for oars &c. at 8 A.M. Met three
french men Comeing up, they proved to be three men from the Ricaras
two of them Reevea & Greinyea wintered with us at the mandans in 1804
we Came too, those men informed us that they were on their way to
the Mandans, and intended to go down to the Illinois this fall. one
of them quit a young lad requested a passage down to the Illinois,
we concented and he got into a Canoe to an Ore. Those men informd
us that 700 Seeoux had passed the Ricaras on their way to war with
the Mandans & Menitarras and that their encampment where the Squaws
and Children wer, was Some place near the Big Bend of this river below.
no ricaras had accompanied them but were all at home, they also informed
us that no trader had arived at the Ricaras this Season, and that
they were informed that the Pania or Ricara Chief who went to the
United States last Spring was a year, died on his return at Smoe place
near the Sieoux river &c. those men had nether powder nor lead we
gave them a horn of powder and Some balls and after a delay of an
hour we parted from the 2 men Reevey & Grienway and proceeded on.
the wind rose and bley from the N. W. at half past 11 a.m. we arived
in view of the upper Ricara villages, a Great number of womin Collecting
wood on the banks, we Saluted the village with four guns and they
returned the Salute by fireing Several guns in the village, I observed
Several very white Lodges on the hill above the Town which the ricaras
from the Shore informed me were Chyennes who had just arived-. we
landed opposit to the 2d Villages and were met by the most of the
men women and children of each village as also the Chyennes they all
appeared anxious to take us by the hand and much rejoiced to See us
return.

I Steped on Shore and was Saluted by the two great Chiefs, whome we had made or given Medals
to as we assend this river in 1804, and also Saluted by a great number both of Ricaras & Chyennes,
as they appeared anxious to here what we had done &c. as well as
to here Something about the Mandans & Minetarras.



The next instant she was on her feet examining Lady Barbara's work-basket, wondering what Dalton
had found in it, wondering, too, why he had looked through it. Crossing to the dresser, she
moved the plates and cups, as he had done, searching for a possible note, or perhaps for a
duplicate key of their former apartment which he might have left for Barbara, and then moved
toward the door of the smaller chamber, behind which her mistress had lain shivering. Her eye
now fell on the box, the lid awry. She remembered that this lid had been in that same position
when she had ordered the intruder from the room, and that, at the time, she had thought it
strange that Lady Barbara, always so careful, had not fastened it to keep the dust from its
contents. Stooping closer, she examined the various articles. She noted that one sleeve of
the lace blouse had been lifted from its place, while the other sleeve remained snug where
her mistress had tucked it. In pulling out one of the upper pieces, this sleeve must have been
caught in its meshes and dragged clear. This could only have been done by the mantilla which,
she distinctly remembered, had been laid neatly on top the afternoon before, so as to be ready
for work in the morning.

"He's got it," she exclaimed in an excited tone, replacing the lid. "I'll stake my life he
stole it, the dirty cur! He's done it to get even with her. She'll be back in a little while,
half distracted. There is going to be trouble, plenty of it. I'll have Stephen here right away,
and we'll talk it over. I can take care of her when she's inside these rooms, but what if that
man waylays her on the street and raises a row, and she goes back to him to smooth over things?
This has got to stop. She won't live the month out if he gets to hounding her again, and now
he's found out where she is, I shan't have a moment's peace. What a hang-dog face he's got
on him! And he's a coward, too, or he wouldn't have slunk out when I ordered him. And he had
it on him all the time! I wonder what he'll do with it. Hold it over her, I expect; maybe take
it to Rosenthal's with some lie about her, so they will discharge her and she come back to him.

"Maybe--" Here she stopped, and grew suddenly grave. "Maybe he'll--No, I don't think he'd dare
do that, but I've got to get Stephen, and I'll go for him this minute. Going's quicker than
a letter, and I'll leave word down-stairs where I'm gone, so she'll know when she comes in,
and I'll fix her coffee so she can get it."

Hurrying into her own room, she began changing her dress, putting on her shoes, taking her
night cloak and big, flare bonnet from the hook behind the door, talking to herself as she moved.

"It's getting worse all the time, instead of getting better. God knows what's to become of
her! She's most beat out now, and can't stand much more; and she's the best of the lot, except
Mr. Felix, for she's clean inside of her, and only her heart is to blame--and that father of
hers, Lord Carnavon, with his dirty pride, and this scoundrel she's wrecking her life on, and
all the fine ladies at home who turned up their noses at her when half of them are twice as
bad--oh, I know 'em--you can't fool Martha Munger! I've been too long with 'em. And this poor
child who--Oh! I tell you this is a bad business, and it's getting worse--yes, it's getting
worse. Rosenthal isn't going to stand losing that piece of lace, without its costing somebody
some money. Stephen's got to come and be around evenings while I'm out. And I'll go with her
to Rosenthal's and fetch her back home, so that man Dalton can't frighten the life out of her."

She put the coffee-pot where it would keep hot, and laid the cups and saucers ready for her
mistress. This done, she shut the door, and made her way down-stairs. "Tell Mrs. Stanton when
she comes in," she said to the old woman who acted as janitor, "that I've gone to see my brother,
and that I'll be back just as soon as I can."

All hopes which had cheered Lady Barbara on her way to Rosenthal's, even when she climbed the
long stairs and was ushered into Mangan's small office, died out of her heart when she saw
the manager's face. She had anticipated an outburst of anger, followed by a brutal tirade over
her carelessness in wrapping up the mantilla with the other pieces and leaving it behind her
the night before. Instead, he came forward to meet her--his lean, nervous body twitching with
expectation.

"Well, this is something like! Didn't think you'd turn up for an hour. Let's have it." This
with a low chuckle--the nearest he ever got to a laugh.

"Something dreadful has happened, Mr. Mangan," she began, stumbling over her words, her knees
shaking under her. "I thought I had wrapped the mantilla up with the pieces I brought you last
night, but I see now that--"

"You thought! Say, what are you giving me? Ain't you got it?"

"I have not, and I don't know what has become of it. It was not in the box this morning, and--"

"IT WASN'T IN THE BOX THIS MORNING!" he roared. "See here, what kind of a damn fool do you
take me for?" He wheeled suddenly, caught her by the wrist, dragged her clear of the door,
and shut it behind her.

"Now, Mrs. Stanton," he said, in cold, incisive tones, "let's you and I have this out, and
I want to tell you right here that I believe you're lying, and I've been suspecting it for
some time. Now, make a clean breast of it. You've pawned it, haven't you?"

"I--pawn it? You think I--I won't allow you to speak to me in that way. I--"

"Oh, cut that out, it won't wash here. Now, listen! I've got to get that mantilla, see? And
I'm going to get it if I go through every pawn-shop in town with a fine-tooth comb. I orter
to have had better sense than to let you take it out of the shop. Now open up, and I'll help
you straighten out things. Where is it? Come, now--no side-tracking."

She had sunk down on the chair, her fingers tightly interlocked, his words stunning her like
blows. Their full meaning she missed in her dazed condition. All she knew was that, in some
way, she must defend herself.

"Mr. Mangan, will you please listen to me? I have not pawned it, and I would never dream of
doing such a thing. I can only think that some one has taken it from the box--I don't know
who. I came to you the moment I discovered the loss. I thought perhaps I had wrapped it up
with the other pieces I brought you last night, or that I had dropped it in the street on my
way here. And, yet, none of these things seemed possible when I began to think about it. I
will do all I can to pay for it. You can take its value from my work until it is all paid."

Mangan, who had been pacing the floor, hearing nothing of her explanation--his mind intent
upon his next move--dragged a chair next to hers.

"Now, pull yourself together for a minute, Mrs. Stanton. I'm not going to be ugly. I'm going
to make this just as easy as I can for you. You've got a lot of common sense, and you're some
different from the women who handle our stuff. I've seen that, and that's why I've trusted
you. Now, think of me a little. That mantilla don't belong to Rosenthal's. It belongs to a
big customer who lives up near the Park, and who left it here on condition we had it mended
on time. It's worth $250 if it's worth a cent, and it's worth a lot more to me, because I lose
my job if I don't get hold of it to-day. It's a New Year's present and has got to be sent home
to-night. Now, don't that make things look a little different to you? And now, one thing more,
and I'm going to put it up to you, just between ourselves, and nobody will get onto it--nobody
around here. If it's a matter of ten or fifteen dollars, I've got the money right here in my
clothes. And you can slip out and I'll keep close behind, and you can go in and get it, and
I'll bring it back here, and that's all there will be to it. Now, be decent to me. I've been
decent to you ever since you come here. Ain't that so?"

Lady Barbara had now begun to understand. This man was accusing her of lying, if not of theft,
while she sat powerless before him, incapable of speech. Once, as the horror of his suspicion
rose before her, she felt a wild impulse to cry out, even to throw herself on his mercy--telling
him her story and Martha's suspicions. Then the recollection of the cunning of the man, his
vulgarity, his insincerity, slowly steadied her. Her secret must be kept, and she must not
anger him further.

"Perhaps, Mr. Mangan, if you came with me to my rooms, and saw my old--" she paused, then added
softly, "the old woman I live with, and I showed you where the box is always kept and the way
the door opens, perhaps you could help us to find out how it could have happened."

Mangan rose and pushed back his chair. "Well, you are the limit!" he gritted between his teeth.
"I guess I'm in for it. The old man will be howling mad, and I don't blame him."

He walked to his desk, picked up his telephone, and, in a restrained voice, said: "Send Pickert
up here. I'm in my office. Tell him there's something doing."

Lady Barbara rose from her chair and stood waiting. She did not know who Pickert was nor whether
her pleading had moved Mangan, who had now resumed his seat at the desk, piled high with papers,
one of which he was studying closely.

"And you don't think it will do any good if you come to my room?"

Mangan shook his head.

"And shall I wait any longer?" she continued. The words were barely audible. She knew her dismissal
had come and that she must face another dreary hunt for new work.

Mangan did not raise his head. "Sit down. I'll tell you when I'm through."

The door opened and a thick-set man, in a brown suit and derby hat, stepped in.

Mangan wheeled his chair and fronted the two. "This woman, Pickert, is carried on our pay-roll
as Mrs. Stanton. She's got a room off St. Mark's Place. Here's the number. About a week ago
I gave her a lace mantilla to fix, something good--worth over $200--and every day she's been
coming here with a new lie. Now she says she's lost it. She's either got it down where she
lives or she's pawned it. I've done what I could to save her, but she sticks to it. Better
take some one from the office, down-stairs, with you. Maybe when she thinks it over she'll
come to her senses. Take her along with you. I'm through."

As the man stepped forward, Lady Barbara sprang away from his touch. "You do not mean you are
going to let this man take me--Mr. Mangan, you must not, you shall not! You would not commit
that outrage. Do you mean--?"

Pickert made a gesture of disgust, his fingers outspread. "Keep all that for the captain. It
won't cut any ice here, and you'd better not talk. Now come along, and don't make any fuss.
If it's a mistake, you can clear it up at the station-house. I ain't going to touch you. You
keep ahead until you get to the street-door. I'll be right behind, and meet you on the sidewalk."

Lady Barbara drew herself up proudly. "I won't allow it!" she cried; "what I told you--"

Pickert swaggered closer. "Drop that, will you? I got my orders. You heard 'em, didn't you?
Will you go easy, or shall I have to--" and he half dragged a pair of handcuffs from his side
pocket. "Now, you do just as I tell you; it'll all come right, and there won't nobody know
what's goin' on. You get to hollerin' and mussin' up things and there'll be trouble, see? Open
that door now, and walk out just as if everything was reg'lar."

Chapter XX

The routine of Felix's daily life had been broken this morning by the receipt of a letter.
The postman had handed it to him as he crossed the street from Kitty's to Kling's, the tramp
who was sweeping the sidewalk having pointed him out.

"That's him," cried the tramp. "That's Mr. O'Day. Catch him before he gets inside his place,
or you'll lose him. Here, I'll take it."

"You'll take nothin'. Get out of my way."

"For me?" asked Felix, coloring slightly as the postman accosted him.

"Yes, if you're Mr. O'Day."

"I'm afraid I am. Thank you. If you have any others, bring them here to Mr. Kling's, where
I can always be found during the day."

He glanced at the seal and the address, but kept it in his hands until he reached Kling's counter,
where he settled into a chair, and with the greatest care slit the envelope with his knife.
A year had passed since he had received a letter, nor had he expected any.

He read it through to the end, turning the pages again, rereading certain passages, his face
giving no hint of the contents, folded the sheets, put them back in the envelope, and slid
the whole into his inside pocket. After a little he rose, stood for a moment watching Fudge,
who, now that Masie had gone to school, had taken up his customary place in the window, his
nose pressed against the pane. Then, as if some sudden resolve had seized him, he walked quickly
to the rear of the store in search of his employer.

Otto was poring over his books, his bald head glistening under the rays of the gas-jet, which
he had lighted to assist him in his work, the morning being dark.

"I have been wanting to talk to you for some time, Mr. Kling, about Masie," he began abruptly.
"I may be going home to England, perhaps for a few weeks, perhaps longer, and I should like
to take her with me. I have a sister who would look after her, and the trip would do her a
world of good. I have been wanting to do this for a long time, but I am a little freer now
to carry out the plan I had for her. And so I have come to propose it to you."

Otto listened gravely, his fat features frozen into calm. This clerk of his had made him many
startling propositions, and every surrender had brought him profit. But turning over Beesving
to him meant something so different that the father in him stood aghast. Yet his old habit
of deference did not desert him when at last he spoke:

"Vell, vat vill I do? You knew I don't got notin' but Beesving. We'll have it cold as blazes by
morning."

As the fire roared, and the wind whistled about their miserable barracks, he sank away into dreamland
again. He had hardly been sufficiently awakened to break the thread of his dreams. His mind
however was disturbed by the entrance of the officer, and though he wooed back the gentle dream,
it had lost much of its charm and brightness.

He saw Morgianna no longer wreathed in sweet smiles; her face was expressive of distress and
agony. The joy and sunlight had given place to sorrow and gloom.

What had occasioned this change?

"Morgianna, do you not love me?"

She bowed her head and wept.

"What is amiss?"

She pointed to her once beautiful home, and he discovered that it was in flames. Painted demons,
whose yells seemed to make the earthquake, were dancing about the blazing, crackling building.
Then wild cheers came from the ocean, with the boom of a cannon.

He saw British marines, headed by Captain Snipes and Lieutenant Matson, leap from boats and rush
toward them as they stood on the beach.

"Fly! Morgianna, fly!" he cried.

She turned to run, and Fernando, all unarmed as he was, wheeled to face the foe. Suddenly there
came a rattling crash of firearms. He saw Morgianna throw up her arms, and he sprang toward her,
as she fell bleeding at his feet. He uttered a cry of horror and became conscious of some one
shaking his shoulder.

"Wake up, for Heaven sake, awake! we are attacked!" cried the voice
of Captain Rose.

On his ear, there still came a confused noise of cries, shouts, reports of firearms and boom of
artillery.

"Sergeant Stevens, awake!"

He sprang to his feet and seized his rifle. The roaring of the battle could be plainly heard, and
a cannon-ball came crashing through the top of their miserable shanty.

They leaped out to find all in utter confusion. General Winchester, who, despite his faults, was
no coward, was mounted on his horse rallying his men at every point.

Wells was forming on the open fields, and Lewis, in a very disadvantageous position, was making
a strong fight. It was scarcely daylight yet. The air was sharp and frosty; but the snow had
ceased falling. Day was dawning; but in the deeper shadows of the
wood the night lingered in patches.

From the forest came those streams of fire, those storms of grape-shot and the yells of savage
demons. A bombshell came screaming through the air and fell into one of the shanties, exploding
and scattering the loose boards in every direction.

"Who has attacked
us?" some of the officers asked Winchester.

"Proctor from Malden,"
was the answer.

It was just as day began to dawn, that Proctor, with
his combined force of British, Canadians and Indians, attacked the
Americans, while Fernando was still lost in the mazes of a troubled
dream. With his right covered with artillery, and his flanks with
marksmen, Proctor advanced at first gallantly; but when he approached
within musket-shot of the pickets, he was met by such a galling and
incessant fire, that the centre of his army fell back in confusion.
On the left, however, he was more successful. Perceiving the exposed
situation of the detachment under Wells, Proctor hastened to concentrate
all his forces against it. A furious conflict ensued on this part
of the field. Sharp and rapid volleys followed in quick succession
from either side, while high and clear above the terrible din of battle,
rose the war-whoop of savages and the wild cheers of the Kentuckians.
That little band, unprotected as it was, could not long hold out against
overwhelming numbers. The sun rose over the bleak woods, and, after
a short fight of twenty minutes, Winchester ordered Wells to fall
back and gain the enclosures of Lewis.

At the first symptom of retreat,
the enemy redoubled their exertions and pressed so obstinately on
the Americans, that the little line was soon thrown into disorder.
A panic seized the Kentuckians, who had just defended themselves so
bravely, and mistaking the command to fall back, for directions to
retreat, they rushed to the river, which they crossed on the ice,
and began to fly through the woods, in the direction of the Maumee
Rapids. Exhilarated by victory, the British gave pursuit, the chase
being led by the savages, who tasted, in anticipation, the blood of
the fugitives. In vain Winchester, riding among the men, endeavored
to rally them; in vain Colonels Lewis and Allen, hurrying from their
enclosures with a company of fifty men each, struggled to check the
torrent of defeat. It was Porterfield's busy time, and Codman had
all he could jump to. No, she could not ask them. Here she stepped out on the sidewalk to get
a broader view of the situation, her mind intent on solving the problem.

At that same instant she saw Kling's door swing wide and Father Cruse step out, Felix beside
him. The two shook each other's hands in parting, Felix going back into the shop, and Father
Cruse taking the short-cut across the street to where Kitty stood--an invariable custom of
his whenever he found himself in her neighborhood.

Instantly her anxiety vanished. "Look at it!" she cried enthusiastically. "Can you beat it?
There he comes. God must 'a' sent him!" Then, as she ran to meet him: "Oh, Father, but it's
better than a pair o' sore eyes to see ye! I'm all balled up wi' trouble. John's huntin' a
lost trunk. Bobby's up-stairs with a slab o' raw beef on his head. Mike's locked up for runnin'
over a boy. And my big Jim and my wagon is tied up outside the station, till it's all straightened
out. Will ye help me?"

"I am on my way now to the police station," said the priest in his kindest voice.

"Oh, then, ye heard o' Mike?"

"Not a word. But I often drop in there of a morning. Many of the night arrests need counsel
outside the law, and sometimes I can be of service. Is the boy badly hurt?"

"No, he hollered too loud when the wheel struck him, so they tell me. He's not half as bad
as Bobby, I warrant, who hasn't let a squeak out o' him. Will ye please put in a word for me,
Father? I can't leave here or I'd go meself. I don't care if the captain holds on to Mike for
a while, so he lets me have big Jim and the wagon. John will be up to go bail as soon as he
gets back, if the captain wants it, which he won't, when he finds out who Mike is. Oh, that's
a good soul! I knew ye'd help me. An' how did ye find Mr. Felix?"--a new anxiety now filling
her mind.

The priest's face clouded. "Oh, very well; he spent last evening with me."

"Oh, that was it, was it? An' were ye trampin' the streets with him, too? It was pretty nigh
daylight when he come in. I always know, for he wakes me when he shuts his door."

The priest, evidently absorbed in some strain of thought, parried her question with another:
"And so the boy was not badly hurt? Well, that is something to be thankful for. Perhaps I may
know his people. I will send Mike and the wagon back to you, if I can. Good-by." And he touched
his hat, passing up the street with his long, even stride, the skirt of his black cassock clinging
to his knees.

The arrest, so far as could be seen from Mike's general deportment, had not troubled that gentleman
in the least. He had nodded pleasantly to the captain, who, in return, had frowned severely
at him while the father of the boy was making the complaint; had winked good-naturedly at him
the moment the accuser had left the room; had asked after Kitty and John, motioned to him to
stay around until somebody put in an appearance to go bail, and had then busied himself with
more important matters. A thick-set man, in a brown suit and derby hat, accompanied by an officer
and another man, had brought in a frail woman, looking as if life were slowly ebbing out of
her; and the four were in a row before his desk. The usual questions were asked and answered
by the detective and the clerk--the nature of the charge, the name and address of the party
robbed, the name and address of the accused--and the entries properly made.

During the hearing, the frail woman had stood with bent head, dazed and benumbed. When her
name was asked, she had made no answer nor did she give her residence. "I am an Englishwoman,"
was all she had said.

Mike, now privileged to enjoy the freedom of the room, had been watching the proceedings with
increasing interest, so much so that he had edged up to the group, as close as he dared, where
he could get the light full on the woman. When the words, "I am an Englishwoman," fell from
her lips, he let out an oath, and slapped his thigh with the fiat of his hand. "Of course it
is! I thought I know'd her when she come in. English, is she? What a lot o' lies they do be
puttin' up. She never saw England. She's a dago from 'cross town. Won't Mrs. Cleary's eyes
pop when I tell her!"

The group in front of the captain's desk disintegrated. The woman, still silent, was led away
to the cell. Rosenthal's clerk, who had made the charge for the firm, had come round to the
captain's side of the desk to sign some papers. Pickert and the officer had already disappeared
through the street-door. At this juncture the priest entered. His presence was noted by every
man in the room, most of whom rose to their feet, some removing their hats.

"Good-morning, captain," he said, including with his bow the other people present. "I have
just left Mrs. Cleary, who tells me that one of her men is in trouble. Ah! I see him now. Is
there anything that I can do for him?"

"Nothing, your reverence; the boy's not much hurt. I don't think it was Mike's fault, from
the testimony, but it's a case of bail, all right."

"I am afraid, captain, she is not worrying so much about our poor Mike here as she is about
the horse and wagon. These she needs, for Mr. Cleary is away, and there is no one to help her.
Perhaps you would be good enough to send an officer with Mike, and let them drive back to her?"

"I guess that won't be necessary, your reverence. See here, Mike, get into your wagon and take
it back to the stable, and bring somebody with you to go bail. We didn't want the wagon, only
there was no place to leave it, and we knew they would send up for it sooner or later. It's
outside now."

"Thank you, captain. And now, Mike, be very sure you come back," exclaimed the priest, with
an admonishing finger; "do you hear?" He always liked the Irishman.

Mike grinned the width of his face, caught up his cap, and made for the door. The priest watched
him until he had cleared the room, then, leaning over the desk, asked: "Anything for me this
morning, captain?"

"No, your reverence, not that I can see. Two drunks come in with the first batch, and a couple
of crooks who had been working the 'elevated'; and a woman, a shoplifter. Got away with a piece
of lace--a mantilla, they called it, whatever that is. She's just gone down to wait for the
four o'clock delivery. It's a case of grand larceny. They say the lace is worth $250. Wasn't
that about it?"

Rosenthal's man bobbed his head. He had not lifted his hat to the priest, and seemed to regard
him with suspicion.

"What sort of a looking woman is she?" continued the priest.

"Oh, the same old kind; they're all alike. Nothing to say--too smart for that. I guess she
stole it, all right. All I could get out of her was that she was an Englishwoman, but she didn't
look it."

The priest lowered his head, an expression of suddenly awakened interest on his face. "May
I see her?" he asked, in an eager tone.

"Why, sure! Bunky, take Father Cruse down. He wants to talk to that Englishwoman."

To most unfortunates, whether innocent or guilty, the row of polished steel bars which open
and close upon those in the grip of the law, are poised rifles awaiting the order to fire.
To a woman like Lady Barbara, these guarded a dark and loathsome tomb, in which her last hope
lay buried. That she had not deserved the punishment meted out to her did not soothe her agony.
She had deserved none of Dalton's cruelty, and yet she had withered under its lash. This was
the end; beyond, lay only a slow, lingering death, with her torture increasing as the hours
crept on.

The sound of the turnkey's hand on the lock roused her to consciousness.

"Bring her outside where I can talk to her," said Father Cruse, pointing to a bench in the
corridor.

She followed the guard mechanically, as a whipped spaniel follows its master, her steps dragging,
her body trembling, her head bowed as if awaiting some new humiliation. She had no strength
to resist. Something in the priest's quiet, in the way he trod beside her, seemed to have reassured
her, for as she sank on the bench beside him, she leaned over, laid one hand on his sleeve,
and asked feebly: "Are they going to let me go?"

"That I cannot say, my good woman; I can only hope so." He looked toward the guard. "Better
leave us for a while, Bunky." The turnkey touched his cap and mounted the narrow iron steps
to the room above.

Father Cruse waited until the footsteps had ceased to echo in the corridor, and then turned
to Lady Barbara. "And now tell me something about yourself; have you no friends you can send
for? I will see they get your message. The captain told me you were English. Is this true?"

She had withdrawn her hand and now sat with averted face, the faint flicker of hope his presence
had enkindled extinguished by his evasive answer. Only when he repeated the question did she
reply, and then in a mere whisper, without lifting her head: "Yes, I am English."

"And your people, are they where you can reach them?"

She did not answer; there was nothing to be gained by yielding to his curiosity. Nor did she
intend to reply to any more of his questions. He was only one of those kind priests who looked
after the poor and whose sympathy, however well meant, would be of little value. If she told
him how cruel had been the wrong done her, and how unjust had been her arrest, it would make
no difference; he could not help her.

"There must be somebody," he urged. He had read her indecision in the nervous play of her fingers,
as he had read many another human emotion in his time. "There must be somebody," he repeated.

"There is only Martha," she answered at last, yielding to his influence. "She was my nurse
when I was a child. She is as poor as I am. She will come to me if you will send word to her.
They would not listen to me at Rosenthal's when I begged them to bring her to the store." She
lifted her head and stared wildly about her. "Oh, the injustice of it all--and the awful horror
of this place! How can men do such things? I told them the truth, Father, I told them the truth.
I never stole it. How could I ever steal anything? How dared he speak to me as he did?"

She turned, straining her whole body as if in mortal anguish; then, with her shoulder against
the hard, whitewashed wall, she broke at last into sobs.

The priest sat still, waiting and watching, as a surgeon does a patient slowly emerging from
delirium.

"Men are seldom reasonable, my good woman, when they lose their property, and they often do
things which they regret afterward. Of what were you accused?"

His tone reassured her, and, for the first time, she looked directly at him. "Of stealing a
mantilla which I had taken to my rooms to repair."

"Whose was it?"

"Rosenthal's, for whom I worked."

"The large store near by here, on Third Avenue?"

"Yes."

Father Cruse lapsed once more into silence, absorbed in a study of certain salient points of
her person--her way of sitting and of folding her hands, her thin, delicately modelled frame,
the pallor of her oval face, with its mobile mouth, the singular whiteness of her teeth, and
the blue of her eyes, shaded by the cheap, black-straw hat which hid her forehead. Then he
glanced at her feet, one of which protruded from her coarse skirt--no larger than a child's.

When he spoke again, it was in a positive way, as if his inspection had caused him to adopt
a definite course which he would now follow. "This old nurse of yours, this woman you called
Martha, does she know of any one who could get bail for you? You can only stay here for a few
hours, and then they will take you to the Tombs, unless some one can go bail. I know the Rosenthals,
and they would, I think, listen to any reasonable proposition."

"Would they let me go home, then?"

"Yes, until your trial came off."

She shuddered, hugging herself the closer. Her mind had not gone that far. It was the present
horror that had confronted her, not a trial in court.

"Martha has a brother," she said at last, "who has a business of some kind, and who might help.
If you will bring her to me, she can find him."

"You don't remember what his business is?" he continued.

"I think it is something to do with fitting out ships. He was once a mate on one of my father's
vessels and--"

She stopped abruptly, frightened now at her own indiscretion. She had been wrong in wanting
to send for Stephen, even in referring to him. Whatever befell her, she was determined that
her people at home should not suffer further on her account.

Father Cruse had caught the look, and his heart gave a bound, though no gesture betrayed him.
"You have not told me your name," he said simply--as if it were a matter of routine in cases
like hers.

She glanced at him quickly. "Does it make any difference?"

"It might. I do not believe you are a criminal, but if I am to help you as I want to do, I
must know the truth."

She thought for a moment. Here was something she could not escape. The assumed name had so
far shielded her. She would brave it out as she had done before.

"They call me Mrs. Stanton."

"Is that your true name?"

The Carnavons were imperious, unforgiving, and sometimes brutal. Many of them had been roues,
gamblers, and spendthrifts, but none of them had ever been a liar.

"No!" she answered firmly. 

"Prisident Madison will tell yez to moind yer own business," the Hibernian answered.

"We'll see about that!"

Terrence was determined on making the journey, and he set out next day by the mail coach for
Washington City. Public houses in Washington were not numerous then, yet there were a few good
hotels, and he put up at the old Continental House. Terrence, with all his reckless impetuosity,
proceeded carefully to his point. Where boldness won success, he
was bold; where caution and prudence were essential to win, he was
cautious and prudent.

He noticed a door opening into a room from
the main corridor, over which was tacked a strip of white canvas bearing
in large black letters the words:

"HEADQUARTERS OF THE PEACE PARTY."
I hope it will be the last; I hope, too, that the charge made against you will be proved false.
But does not all this make you realize that you should be frank with me?"

She drew herself up with a certain dignity infinitely pathetic, yet in which, like the flavor
of some old wine left in a drained glass, there lingered the aroma of her family traditions.
"I am very grateful, sir, to you. I know you only want to be kind, but please do not ask me
to tell you anything more. It would only make other people unhappy. There is no one but myself
to blame for my poverty, and for all I have gone through. What is to become of me I do not
know, but I cannot make my people suffer any more. Do not ask me."

"It might end their suffering," he replied quickly. "I have a case in point now where a man
has been searching New York for months, hoping to get news of his wife, who left him nearly
a year ago. Here he was joined by John Brant, son of the great Mohawk chief with one hundred
warriors from Grand River.
By his extreme caution and delay, Hull lost his opportunity to capture
Fort Malden, which was soon strongly reinforced by British and Indians.
 He has nothing in his heart but pity for that poor woman, who
he fears has been left stranded by the man she trusted. So far he has heard nothing of her.
I left him hardly an hour ago. Now, there, you see, is a case where just a word of frankness
and truth might have ended all their sufferings. I told Mr. O'Day this morning, when I left
him, that--"

She had grown paler and paler during the long recital, her wide-open eyes staring into his,
her bosom heaving with suppressed excitement, until at the mention of Felix's name, she staggered
to her feet, and cried: "You know Felix O'Day?"

"Yes, thank God, I do, and you are his wife, Lady Barbara O'Day, Lord Carnavon's daughter."

She cowered like a trapped animal, uncertain which way to spring. In her agony she shrank against
the wall, her arms outstretched. How did this man know all the secrets of her life? Then there
arose a calming thought. He was a priest--a man who listened and did not betray. Perhaps, after
all, he could help her. He wanted the truth. He should have it.

"Yes," she answered, her voice sinking. "I am Lord Carnavon's daughter."

"And Felix O'Day's wife?"

"And Felix O'Day's wife," came the echo, and, with the last word, her last vestige of strength
seemed to leave her. 

I observed the appearance of 3 fires in the houses which appeared to have been made 10 or 12
days past. we proceeded on about 10 miles lower and encamped on the
S. W. Side opposit our outward bound encampment of the 21st of Septr.

 The denial came with a lift of the head, her eyes kindling,
her bosom heaving.

"I believe you. There is not a moment to be lost." The priest and father confessor were gone
now; it was the man of affairs who was speaking. "I will see Rosenthal at once, and then send
for your nurse. Give me her address."

