Our lunch was eaten in haste. Big Tom refused the chicken he had provided for us, and strengthened
himself with slices of raw salt pork, which he cut from a hunk with his clasp-knife. We caught
and saddled our horses, who were reluctant to leave the rich feed, enveloped ourselves in waterproofs,
and got into the stony path for the descent just as the torrent came down. It did rain. It
lightened, the thunder crashed, the wind howled and twisted the treetops. It was as if we were
pursued by the avenging spirits of the mountains for our intrusion. Such a tempest on this
height had its terrors even for our hardy guide. He preferred to be lower down while it was
going on. The crash and reverberation of the thunder did not trouble us so much as the swish
of the wet branches in our faces and the horrible road, with its mud, tripping roots, loose
stones, and slippery rocks. Progress was slow. The horses were in momentary danger of breaking
their legs. In the first hour there was not much descent. In the clouds we were passing over
Clingman, Gibbs, and Holdback. The rain had ceased, but the mist still shut off all view, if
any had been attainable, and bushes and paths were deluged. The descent was more uncomfortable
than the ascent, and we were compelled a good deal of the way to lead the jaded horses down
the slippery rocks.

From the peak to the Widow Patten's, where we proposed to pass the night, is twelve miles,
a distance we rode or scrambled down, every step of the road bad, in five and a half hours.
Halfway down we came out upon a cleared place, a farm, with fruit-trees and a house in ruins.
Here had been a summer hotel much resorted to before the war, but now abandoned. Above it we
turned aside for the view from Elizabeth rock, named from the daughter of the proprietor of
the hotel, who often sat here, said Big Tom, before she went out of this world. It is a bold
rocky ledge, and the view from it, looking south, is unquestionably the finest, the most pleasing
and picture-like, we found in these mountains. In the foreground is the deep gorge of a branch
of the Swannanoa, and opposite is the great wall of the Blue Ridge (the Blue Ridge is the most
capricious and inexplicable system) making off to the Blacks. Rufus Frost, who had watched repeatedly,
then hit on a stratagem. First he cut off about a foot from the barrel of a shotgun, to shorten
it, and then made a kind of bag, or sack, by sewing two sheep-pelts together. Thus equipped,
he repaired to the pasture after dark, and joined himself to the
flock, not as a watcher, but as a sheep.

That is to say, he crept into the sheepskin bag, which was also capacious enough to contain
the short gun, and lay down on the outskirts of the flock, a little aloof.

The sheep were lying in a group, ruminating, as is their habit, by night. Rufus drew a tangle
of wool over his head, and otherwise contrived to pose as a sheep lying down.
 It was like an aisle in a temple; high overhead was
the somber, leafy roof, supported by gigantic columns. Few widows have such an avenue of approach
to their domain as the Widow Patten has.

Cheering as this outcome was from the day's struggle and storm, the
Professor seemed sunk in a profound sadness. The auguries which the
Friend drew from these signs of civilization of a charming inn and a
royal supper did not lighten the melancholy of his mind.
   'T is not enough that through the cloud thou break,
   To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
   For no man well of such a salve can speak
   That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
   Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief:
   Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss."

"Loss of what?" cried the Friend, as he whipped up his halting steed.

"Loss of self-respect. I feel humiliated that I consented to climb this mountain."

"Nonsense! You'll live to thank me for it, as the best thing you ever did. It's over and done
now, and you've got it to tell your friends."

"That's just the trouble. They'll ask me if I went up Mitchell, and I shall have to say I did.
My character for consistency is gone. Not that I care much what they think, but my own self-respect
is gone. I never believed I would do it. A man ca'nt afford to lower himself in his own esteem,
at my time of life."

The Widow Patten's was only an advanced settlement in this narrow valley on the mountain-side,
but a little group of buildings, a fence, and a gate gave it the air of a place, and it had
once been better cared for than it is now. Few travelers pass that way, and the art of entertaining,
if it ever existed, is fallen into desuetude. We unsaddled at the veranda, and sat down to
review our adventure, make the acquaintance of the family, and hear the last story from Big
Tom. The mountaineer, though wet, was as fresh as a daisy, and fatigue in no wise checked the
easy, cheerful flow of his talk. He was evidently a favorite with his neighbors, and not unpleasantly
conscious of the extent of his reputation. But he encountered here another social grade. The
Widow Patten was highly connected. We were not long in discovering that she was an Alexander.
She had been a schoolmate of Senator Vance,--"Zeb Vance" he still was to her,--and the senator
and his wife had stayed at her house. I wish I could say that the supper, for which we waited
till nine o'clock, was as "highly connected" as the landlady. It was, however, a supper that
left its memory. We were lodged in a detached house, which we had to ourselves, where a roaring
wood fire made amends for other things lacking. It was necessary to close the doors to keep
out the wandering cows and pigs, and I am bound to say that, notwithstanding the voices of
the night, we slept there the sleep of peace.

In the morning a genuine surprise awaited us; it seemed impossible, but the breakfast was many
degrees worse than the supper; and when we paid our bill, large for the region, we were consoled
by the thought that we paid for the high connection as well as for the accommodations. This
is a regular place of entertainment, and one is at liberty to praise it without violation of
delicacy. 

The dogs looked at each other, licked the wool from their mouths, and sat down to contemplate
him further.

Rufus, on his part, waxed even more amazed as he looked, for by the
bright moonlight he at once identified the four dogs. We made a detour of three miles to what was represented as a regular shop.
The owner had secured the service of a colored blacksmith for a special job, and was, not inclined
to accommodate us; he had no shoes, no nails. But the colored blacksmith, who appreciated the
plight we were in, offered to make a shoe, and to crib four nails from those he had laid aside
for a couple of mules; and after a good deal of delay, we were enabled to go on. The incident
shows, as well as anything, the barrenness and shiftlessness of the region. A horseman with
whom we rode in the morning gave us a very low estimate of the trustworthiness of the inhabitants.
The valley is wild and very pretty all the way down to Colonel Long's,--twelve miles,--but
the wretched-looking people along the way live in a wretched manner.

