          'To the good old plan
That they should take who have the power
And they should keep who can.'

[Footnote: These lines of Wordsworth on Rob Roy's grave almost literally translate the speech
Plutarch gives the first Kelt of history, Brennus.]

The Fabii, on receiving this answer, were so foolish as to transgress the rule, owned by the
savage Gauls, that an ambassador should neither fight nor be fought with; they joined the Clusians,
and one brother, named Quintus, killed a remarkably large and tall Gallic chief in single combat.
Brennus was justly enraged, and sent messengers to Rome to demand that the brothers should
be given up to him for punishment. The priests and many of the Senate held that the rash young
men had deserved death as covenant-breakers; but their father made strong interest for them,
and prevailed not only to have them spared, but even chosen as tribunes to lead the legions
in the war that was expected. [Footnote: These events happened during an experiment made by
the Romans of having six military tribunes instead of two consuls.] Thus he persuaded the whole
nation to take on itself the guilt of his sons, a want of true self-devotion uncommon among
the old Romans, and which was severely punished.

The Gauls were much enraged, and hurried southwards, not waiting for plunder by the way, but
declaring that they were friends to every State save Rome. The Romans on their side collected
their troops in haste, but with a lurking sense of having transgressed; and since they had
gainsaid the counsel of their priests, they durst not have recourse to the sacrifices and ceremonies
by which they usually sought to gain the favor of their gods. Even among heathens, the saying
has often been verified, 'a sinful heart makes failing hand', and the battle on the banks of
the River Allia, about eleven miles from Rome, was not so much a fight as a rout. The Roman
soldiers were ill drawn up, and were at once broken. Some fled to Veii and other towns, many
were drowned in crossing the Tiber, and it was but a few who showed in Rome their shame-stricken
faces, and brought word that the Gauls were upon them.

Had the Gauls been really in pursuit, the Roman name and nation would have perished under their
swords; but they spent three day in feasting and sharing their plunder, and thus gave the Romans
time to take measures for the safety of such as could yet escape. There seems to have been
no notion of defending the city, the soldiers had been too much dispersed; but all who still
remained and could call up something of their ordinary courage, carried all the provisions
they could collect into the stronghold of the Capitol, and resolved to hold out there till
the last, in hopes that the scattered army might muster again, or that the Gauls might retreat,
after having revenged themselves on the city. Everyone who could not fight, took flight, taking
with them all they could carry, and among them went the white-clad troop of vestal virgins,
carrying with them their censer of fire, which was esteemed sacred, and never allowed to be
extinguished. A man named Albinus, who saw these sacred women footsore, weary, and weighted
down with the treasures of their temple, removed his own family and goods from his cart and
seated them in it--an act of reverence for which he was much esteemed--and thus they reached
the city of Cumae. The only persons left in Rome outside the Capitol were eighty of the oldest
senators and some of the priests. Some were too feeble to fly, and would not come into the
Capitol to consume the food that might maintain fighting men; but most of them were filled
with a deep, solemn thought that, by offering themselves to the weapons of the barbarians,
they might atone for the sin sanctioned by the Republic, and that their death might be the
saving of the nation. This notion that the death of a ruler would expiate a country's guilt
was one of the strange presages abroad in the heathen world of that which alone takes away
the sin of all mankind.

On came the Gauls at last. The gates stood open, the streets were silent, the houses' low-browed
doors showed no one in the paved courts. No living man was to be seen, till at last, hurrying
down the steep empty streets, they reached the great open space of the Forum, and there they
stood still in amazement, for ranged along a gallery were a row of ivory chairs, and in each
chair sat the figure of a white-haired, white- bearded man, with arms and legs bare, and robes
either of snowy white, white bordered with purple, or purple richly embroidered, ivory staves
in their hands, and majestic, unmoved countenances. So motionless were they, that the Gauls
stood still, not knowing whether they beheld men or statues. A wondrous scene it must have
been, as the brawny, red-haired Gauls, with freckled visage, keen little eyes, long broad sword,
and wide plaid garment, fashioned into loose trousers, came curiously down into the marketplace,
one after another; and each stood silent and transfixed at the spectacle of those grand figures,
still unmoving, save that their large full liquid dark eyes showed them to be living beings.
Surely these Gauls deemed themselves in the presence of that council of kings who were sometimes
supposed to govern Rome, nay, if they were not before the gods themselves. At last, one Gaul,
ruder, or more curious than the rest, came up to one of the venerable figures, and, to make
proof whether he were flesh and blood, stroked his beard. Such an insult from an uncouth barbarian
was more than Roman blood could brook, and the Gaul soon had his doubt satisfied by a sharp
blow on the head from the ivory staff. All reverence was dispelled by that stroke; it was at
once returned by a death thrust, and the fury of the savages wakening in proportion to the
awe that had at first struck them, they rushed on the old senators, and slew each one in his
curule chair.

Then they dispersed through the city, burning, plundering, and destroying. To take the Capitol
they soon found to be beyond their power, but they hoped to starve the defenders out; and in
the meantime they spent their time in pulling down the outer walls, and such houses and temples
as had resisted the fire, till the defenders of the Capitol looked down from their height on
nothing but desolate black burnt ground, with a few heaps of ruins in the midst, and the barbarians
roaming about in it, and driving in the cattle that their foraging parties collected from the
country round. There was much earnest faith in their own religion among the Romans: they took
all this ruin as the just reward of their shelter of the Fabii, and even in their extremity
were resolved not to transgress any sacred rule. Though food daily became more scarce and starvation
was fast approaching, not one of the sacred geese that were kept in Juno's Temple was touched;
and one Fabius Dorso, who believed that the household gods of his family required yearly a
sacrifice on their own festival day on the Quirinal Hill, arrayed himself in the white robes
of a sacrificer, took his sacred images in his arms, and went out of the Capitol, through the
midst of the enemy, through the ruins to the accustomed alter, and there preformed the regular
rites. The Gauls, seeing that it was a religious ceremony, let him pass through them untouched,
and he returned in safety; but Brennus was resolved on completing his conquest, and while half
his forces went out to plunder, he remained with the other half, watching the moment to effect
an entrance into the Capitol; and how were the defenders, worn out with hunger, to resist without
relief from without? And who was there to bring relief to them, who were themselves the Roman
State and government?

Now there was a citizen, named Marcus Furius Camillus, who was, without question, at that time,
the first soldier of Rome, and had taken several of the chief Italian cities, especially that
of Veii, which had long been a most dangerous enemy. But he was a proud, haughty man, and had
brought on himself much dislike; until, at last, a false accusation was brought against him,
that he had taken an unfair share of the plunder of Veii. He was too proud to stand a trial;
and leaving the city, was immediately fined a considerable sum. He had taken up his abode at
the city of Ardea, and was there living when the plundering half of Brennus' army was reported
to be coming thither. Camillus immediately offered the magistrates to undertake their defense;
and getting together all the men who could bear arms, he led them out, fell upon the Gauls
as they all lay asleep and unguarded in the dead of night, made a great slaughter of them,
and saved Ardea. All this was heard by the many Romans who had been living dispersed since
the rout of Allia; and they began to recover heart and spirit, and to think that if Camillus
would be their leader, they might yet do something to redeem the honor of Rome, and save their
friends in the Capitol. An entreaty was sent to him to take the command of them; but, like
a proud, stern man as he was, he made answer, that he was a mere exile, and could not take
upon himself to lead Romans without a decree from the Senate giving him authority. The Senate
was--all that remained of it--shut up in the Capitol; the Gauls were spread all round; how
was that decree to be obtained?

A young man, named Pontius Cominius, undertook the desperate mission. He put on a peasant dress,
and hid some corks under it, supposing that he should find no passage by the bridge over the
Tiber. Traveling all day on foot, he came at night to the bank, and saw the guard at the bridge;
then, having waited for darkness, he rolled his one thin light garment, with the corks wrapped
up in it, round his head, and trusted himself to the stream of Father Tiber, like 'good Horatius'
before him; and he was safely borne along to the foot of the Capitoline Hill. He crept along,
avoiding every place where he saw lights or heard noise, till he came to a rugged precipice,
which he suspected would not be watched by the enemy, who would suppose it too steep to be
climbed from above or below. But the resolute man did not fear the giddy dangerous ascent,
even in the darkness; he swung himself up by the stems and boughs of the vines and climbing
plants, his naked feet clung to the rocks and tufts of grass, and at length he stood on the
top of the rampart, calling out his name to the soldiers who came in haste around him, not
knowing whether he were friend or foe. A joyful sound must his Latin speech have been to the
long-tried, half starved garrison, who had not seen a fresh face for six long months! The few
who represented the Senate and people of Rome were hastily awakened from their sleep, and gathered
together to hear the tidings brought them at so much risk. Pontius told them of the victory
at Ardea, and that Camillus and the Romans collected at Veii were only waiting to march to
their succor till they should give him lawful power to take the command. There was little debate.
The vote was passed at once to make Camillus Dictator, an office to which Romans were elected
upon great emergencies, and which gave them, for the time, absolute kingly control; and then
Pontius, bearing the appointment, set off once again upon his mission, still under shelter
of night, clambered down the rock, and crossed the Gallic camp before the barbarians were yet
awake.

There was hope in the little garrison; but danger was not over. The sharp-eyed Gauls observed
that the shrubs and creepers were broken, the moss frayed, and fresh stones and earth rolled
down at the crag of the Capitol: they were sure that the rock had been climbed, and, therefore,
that it might be climbed again. Should they, who were used to the snowy peaks, dark abysses,
and huge glaciers of the Alps, be afraid to climb where a soft dweller in a tame Italian town
could venture a passage? Brennus chose out the hardiest of his mountaineers, and directed them
to climb up in the dead of night, one by one, in perfect silence, and thus to surprise the
Romans, and complete the slaughter and victory, before the forces assembling at Veii would
come to their rescue.

Silently the Gauls climbed, so stilly that not even a dog heard them; and the sentinel nearest
to the post, who had fallen into a dead sleep of exhaustion from hunger, never awoke. But the
fatal stillness was suddenly broken by loud gabbling, cackling, and flapping of heavy wings.
The sacred geese of Juno, which had been so religiously spared in the famine, were frightened
by the rustling beneath, and proclaimed their terror in their own noisy fashion. The first
to take the alarm was Marcus Manlius, who started forward just in time to meet the foremost
climbers as they set foot on the rampart. One, who raised an axe to strike, lost his arm by
one stroke of Manlius' short Roman sword; the next was by main strength hurled backwards over
the precipice, and Manlius stood along on the top, for a few moments, ready to strike the next
who should struggle up. The whole of the garrison were in a few moments on the alert, and the
attack was entirely repulsed; the sleeping sentry was cast headlong down the rock; and Manlius
was brought, by each grateful soldier, that which was then most valuable to all, a little meal
and a small measure of wine. Still, the condition of the Capitol was lamentable; there was
no certainty that Pontius had ever reached Camillus in safety; and, indeed, the discovery of
his path by the enemy would rather have led to the supposition that he had been seized and
detected. The best hope lay in wearying out the besiegers; and there seemed to be more chance
of this since the Gauls often could be seen from the heights, burying the corpses of their
dead; their tall, bony forms looked gaunt and drooping, and, here and there, unburied carcasses
lay amongst the ruins. Nor were the flocks and herds any longer driven in from the country.
Either all must have been exhausted, or else Camillus and his friends must be near, and preventing
their raids. At any rate, it appeared as if the enemy was quite as ill off as to provisions
as the garrison, and in worse condition as to health. In effect, this was the first example
of the famous saying, that Rome destroys her conquerors. In this state of things one of the
Romans had a dream that Jupiter, the special god of the Capitol, appeared to him, and gave
the strange advice that all the remaining flour should be baked, and the loaves thrown down
into the enemy's camp. Telling the dream, which may, perhaps, have been the shaping of his
own thoughts, that this apparent waste would persuade the barbarians that the garrison could
not soon be starved out, this person obtained the consent of the rest of the besieged. Some
approved the stratagem, and no one chose to act contrary to Jupiter's supposed advice; so the
bread was baked, and tossed down by the hungry men.

After a time, there was a report from the outer guards that the Gallic watch had been telling
them that their leader would be willing to speak with some of the Roman chiefs. Accordingly,
Sulpitius, one of the tribunes, went out, and had a conference with Brennus, who declared that
he would depart, provided the Romans would lay down a ransom, for their Capital and their own
lives, of a thousand pounds' weight of gold. To this Sulpitius agreed, and returning to the
Capitol, the gold was collected from the treasury, and carried down to meet the Gauls, who
brought their own weights. The weights did not meet the amount of gold ornaments that had been
contributed for the purpose, and no doubt the Gauls were resolved to have all that they beheld;
for when Sulpitius was about to try to arrange the balance, Brennus insultingly threw his sword
into his own scale, exclaiming, Voe victis! 'Woe to the conquered!' The Roman was not yet fallen
so low as not to remonstrate, and the dispute was waxing sharp, when there was a confused outcry
in the Gallic camp, a shout from the heights of the Capitol, and into the midst of the open
space rode a band of Roman patricians and knights in armor, with the Dictator Camillus at their
head.

He no sooner saw what was passing, than he commanded the treasure to be taken back, and, turning
to Brennus, said, 'It is with iron, not gold, that the Romans guard their country.'

Brennus declared that the treaty had been sworn to, and that it would be a breach of faith
to deprive him of the ransom; to which Camillus replied, that he himself was Dictator, and
no one had the power to make a treaty in his absence. The dispute was so hot, that they drew
their swords against one another, and there was a skirmish among the ruins; but the Gauls soon
fell back, and retreated to their camp, when they saw the main body of Camillus' army marching
upon them. It was no less than 40,000 in number; and Brennus knew he could not withstand them
with his broken, sickly army. He drew off early the next morning: but was followed by Camillus,
and routed, with great slaughter, about eight miles from Rome; and very few of the Gauls lived
to return home, for those who were not slain in battle were cut off in their flight by the
country people, whom they had plundered.

In reward for their conduct on this occasion, Camillus was termed Romulus, Father of his Country,
and Second Founder of Rome; Marcus Manlius received the honorable surname of Capitolinus; and
even the geese were honored by having a golden image raised to their honor in Juno's temple,
and a live goose was yearly carried in triumph, upon a soft litter, in a golden cage, as long
as any heathen festivals lasted. The reward of Pontius Cominius does not appear; but surely
he, and the old senators who died for their country's sake, deserved to be for ever remembered
for their brave contempt of life when a service could be done to the State.

The truth of the whole narrative is greatly doubted, and it is suspected that the Gallic conquest
was more complete than the Romans ever chose to avow. Their history is far from clear up to
this very epoch, when it is said that all their records were destroyed; but even when place
and period are misty, great names and the main outline of their actions loom through the cloud,
perhaps exaggerated, but still with some reality; and if the magnificent romance of the sack
of Rome be not fact, yet it is certainly history, and well worthy of note and remembrance,
as one of the finest extant traditions of a whole chain of Golden Deeds.

THE TWO FRIENDS OF SYRACUSE

B.C. 380 (CIRCA)

Most of the best and noblest of the Greeks held what was called the Pythagorean philosophy.
This was one of the many systems framed by the great men of heathenism, when by the feeble
light of nature they were, as St. Paul says, 'seeking after God, if haply they might feel after
Him', like men groping in the darkness. Pythagoras lived before the time of history, and almost
nothing is known about him, though his teaching and his name were never lost. There is a belief
that he had traveled in the East, and in Egypt, and as he lived about the time of the dispersion
of the Israelites, it is possible that some of his purest and best teaching might have been
crumbs gathered from their fuller instruction through the Law and the Prophets. "Please, Master
Dale," said he, obstinately, "I'd rather not.

"It is a matter of feeling, you see," said the parson, turning to the umpire; "and I believe the
boy is right."

"If it be a matter of feeling," replied Dr. Riccabocca, "there is no more to be said on it. When
Feeling comes in at the door, Reason has nothing to do but to jump out of the window."

"Go, my good boy," said the parson, pocketing the coin; "but, stop! give me your hand first.
There--I understand you;--good-by!"

Lenny's eyes glistened as the parson shook him by the hand, and, not trusting himself to speak,
he walked off sturdily. The parson wiped his forehead, and sat himself down on the stile beside
the Italian. The view before them was lovely, and both enjoyed it (though not equally) enough
to be silent for some moments. On the other side the lane, seen between gaps in the old oaks and chestnuts
that hung over the mossgrown pales of Hazeldean Park, rose gentle, verdant slopes, dotted with
sheep and herds of deer. A stately avenue stretched far away to the left, and ended at the
right hand within a few yards of a ha-ha that divided the park from a level sward of tableland,
gay with shrubs and flower-pots, relieved by the shade of two mighty cedars. And on this platform,
only seen in part, stood the squire's old-fashioned house, red-brick, with stone mullions, gable-ends,
and quaint chimney-pots. On this side the road, immediately facing the two gentlemen, cottage
after cottage whitely emerged from the curves in the lane, while, beyond, the ground declining gave
an extensive prospect of woods and cornfields, spires and farms. Behind, from a belt of lilacs
and evergreens, you caught a peep of the parsonage-house, backed by woodlands, and a little
noisy rill running in front.

The birds were still in the hedgerows,--only (as if from the very heart of the most distant woods),
there came now and then the mellow note of the cuckoo.

"Verily," said Mr. Dale, softly, "my lot has fallen on a goodly heritage."

The Italian twitched his cloak over him, and sighed almost inaudibly. Perhaps he thought of his
own Summer Land, and felt that, amidst all that fresh verdure of the North, there was no heritage
for the stranger.

However, before the parson could notice the sigh or conjecture the cause, Dr. Riccabocca's thin
lips took an expression almost malignant.

"Per Bacco!" said he; "in every country I observe that the rooks settle where the trees are
the finest. I am sure that, when Noah first landed on Ararat, he must have found some gentleman
in black already settled in the pleasantest part of the mountain, and waiting for his tenth
of the cattle as they came out of the Ark."

The parson fixed his meek eyes on the philosopher, and there was in them something so deprecating
rather than reproachful that Dr. Riccabocca turned away his face, and refilled his pipe. Dr.
Riccabocca abhorred priests; but though Parson Dale was emphatically a parson, he seemed at that
moment so little of what Dr. Riccabocca understood by a priest that the Italian's heart smote
him for his irreverent jest on the cloth. Luckily at this moment there was a diversion to that untoward
commencement of conversation in the appearance of no less a personage than the donkey himself--I
mean the donkey who ate the apple.

CHAPTER VI.

The tinker was a stout, swarthy fellow, jovial and musical withal, for he was singing a stave as
he flourished his staff, and at the end of each refrain down came
the staff on the quarters of the donkey.

The tinker went behind and sang, the donkey went before and was thwacked.

"Yours is a droll country," quoth Dr. Riccabocca; "in mine, it is not the ass that walks first
in the procession that gets the blows."

The parson jumped from the stile, and looking over the hedge that divided the field from the road--"Gently,
gently," said he; "the sound of the stick spoils the singing! Oh, Mr. Sprott, Mr. Sprott! a
good man is merciful to his beast."

The donkey seemed to recognize the voice of its friend, for it stopped short, pricked one ear wistfully,
and looked up. The tinker touched his hat, and looked up too. "Lord bless your reverence! he does
not mind it,--he likes it. I vould not hurt thee; would I, Neddy?"

The donkey shook his head and shivered; perhaps a fly had settled on the sore, which the chestnut
leaves no longer protected.

"I am sure you did not mean to hurt him, Sprott," said the parson,
more politely I fear than honestly,--for he had seen enough of that
cross- grained thing called the human heart, even in the little world
of a country parish, to know that it requires management and coaxing
and flattering, to interfere successfully between a man and his own
donkey,-- "I am sure you did not mean to hurt him; but he has already
got a sore on his shoulder as big as my hand, poor thing!"

"Lord love 'un! yes; that was done a playing with the manger the day I gave 'un oats!" said the
tinker.

Dr. Riccabocca adjusted his spectacles, and surveyed the ass. The ass pricked up his other ear,
and surveyed Dr. Riccabocca. In that mutual survey of physical qualifications, each being regarded
according to the average symmetry of its species, it may be doubted
whether the advantage was on the side of the philosopher.

The parson had a great notion of the wisdom of his friend in all matters not purely ecclesiastical.

"Say
a good word for the donkey!" whispered he.

"Sir," said the doctor, addressing Mr. Sprott, with a respectful salutation, "there's a great kettle
at my house--the Casino--which wants soldering: can you recommend me a tinker?"

"Why, that's all in my line," said Sprott; "and there ben't a tinker in the county that I vould
recommend like myself, thof I say it."

"You jest, good sir," said the doctor, smiling pleasantly.

"A man who can't mend a hole in his own donkey can never demean himself
by patching up my great kettle."

"Lord, sir!" said the tinker, archly, "if I had known that poor Neddy had had two sitch friends
in court, I'd have seen he vas a gintleman, and treated him as sitch."

"/Corpo di Bacco!/" quoth the doctor, "though that jest's not new, I think the tinker comes very
well out of it."

"True; but the donkey!" said the parson; "I've a great mind to buy it."

"Permit me to tell you an anecdote in point," said Dr. Riccabocca.

"Well?" said the parson, interrogatively.

"Once on a time," pursued Riccabocca, "the Emperor Adrian, going to the public baths, saw an
old soldier, who had served under him, rubbing his back against the marble wall. The emperor,
who was a wise, and therefore a curious, inquisitive man, sent for
the soldier, and asked him why he resorted to that sort of friction.

'Because,' answered the veteran, 'I am too poor to have slaves to rub me down.' The emperor was
touched, and gave him slaves and money. The next day, when Adrian went to the baths, all the
old men in the city were to be seen rubbing themselves against the marble as hard as they could.
The emperor sent for them, and asked them the same question which he had put to the soldier;
the cunning old rogues, of course, made the same answer. 'Friends,' said Adrian, 'since there are
so many of you, you will just rub one another!' Mr. Dale, if you don't want to have all the
donkeys in the county with holes in their shoulders, you had better not buy the tinker's!"

"It
is the hardest thing in the world to do the least bit of good," groaned the parson, as he broke
a twig off the hedge nervously, snapped it in two, and flung away the fragments: one of them hit
the donkey on the nose. If the ass could have spoken Latin he would have said, "/Et tu, Brute!/"
As it was, he hung down his ears, and walked on.

"Gee hup," said the tinker, and he followed the ass. Then stopping, he looked over his shoulder,
and seeing that the parson's eyes were gazing mournfully on his /protege/, "Never fear, your reverence,"
cried the tinker, kindly, "I'll not spite 'un."

CHAPTER VII.

"Four, o'clock," cried the parson, looking at his watch; "half an hour after dinner-time, and
Mrs. Dale particularly begged me to be punctual, because of the fine trout the squire sent us.
Will you venture on what our homely language calls 'pot-luck,' Doctor?"

Now Riccabocca was a professed philosopher, and valued himself on his penetration into the motives
of human conduct. And when the parson thus invited him to pot-luck, he smiled with a kind of
lofty complacency; for Mrs. Dale enjoyed the reputation of having what her friends styled "her
little tempers."

And, as well-bred ladies rarely indulge "little tempers" in the presence of a third person
not of the family, so Dr. Riccabocca instantly concluded that he was invited to stand between
the pot and the luck! Nevertheless--as he was fond of trout, and a much more good-natured man
than he ought to have been according to his principles-- he accepted the hospitality; but
he did so with a sly look from over his spectacles, which brought a blush into the guilty cheeks
of the parson. Certainly Riccabocca had for once guessed right in his estimate of human motives.

The
two walked on, crossed a little bridge that spanned the rill, and entered the parsonage lawn.
Two dogs, that seemed to have sat on watch for their master, sprang towards him, barking; and
the sound drew the notice of Mrs. Dale, who, with parasol in hand, sallied out from the sash window
which opened on the lawn. Now, O reader! I know that, in thy secret heart, thou art chuckling
over the want of knowledge in the sacred arcana of the domestic hearth
betrayed by the author; thou art saying to thyself, "A pretty way
to conciliate 'little tempers' indeed, to add to the offence of spoiling
the fish the crime of bringing an unexpected friend to eat it.

Pot-luck, quotha, when the pot 's boiled over this half hour!"

But, to thy utter shame and confusion, O reader! learn that both the author and Parson Dale knew
very well what they were about.

Dr. Riccabocca was the special favourite of Mrs. Dale, and the only person in the whole county
who never put her out, by dropping in. In fact, strange though it may seem at first glance, Dr. Riccabocca
had that mysterious something about him, which we of his own sex can so little comprehend, but
which always propitiates the other. He owed this, in part, to his own profound but hypocritical
policy; for he looked upon woman as the natural enemy to man, against whom it was necessary to
be always on the guard; whom it was prudent to disarm by every species of fawning servility
and abject complaisance. He owed it also, in part, to the compassionate and heavenly nature of
the angels whom his thoughts thus villanously traduced--for women
like one whom they can pity without despising; and there was something
in Signor Riccabocca's poverty, in his loneliness, in his exile, whether
voluntary or compelled, that excited pity; while, despite his threadbare
coat, the red umbrella, and the wild hair, he had, especially when
addressing ladies, that air of gentleman and cavalier, which is or
was more innate in an educated Italian, of whatever rank, than perhaps
in the highest aristocracy of any other country in Europe.

For, though I grant that nothing is more exquisite than the politeness of your French marquis
of the old regime, nothing more frankly gracious than the cordial address of a high-bred English
gentleman, nothing more kindly prepossessing than the genial good-nature of some patriarchal
German, who will condescend to forget his sixteen quarterings in the pleasure of doing you a
favour,--yet these specimens of the suavity of their several nations are rare; whereas blandness
and polish are common attributes with your Italian. They seem to have been immemorially handed
down to him, from ancestors emulating the urbanity of Caesar, and refined by the grace of Horace.

"Dr.
Riccabocca consents to dine with us," cried the parson, hastily.

"If Madame permit?" said the Italian, bowing over the hand extended to him, which, however, he
forbore to take, seeing it was already full of the watch.

"I am only sorry that the trout must be quite spoiled," began Mrs. Dale, plaintively.

"It is not the trout one thinks of when one dines with Mrs. Dale," said the infamous dissimulator.

"But
I see James coming to say that dinner is ready," observed the parson.

"He said that three-quarters of an hour ago, Charles dear," retorted Mrs. Dale, taking the arm
of Dr. Riccabocca.

CHAPTER VIII.

While the parson and his wife are entertaining their guest, I propose to regale the reader with a
small treatise /a propos/ of that "Charles dear," murmured by Mrs. Dale,--a treatise expressly
written for the benefit of The Domestic Circle.

It is an old jest that there is not a word in the language that conveys so little endearment as
the word "dear." But though the saying itself, like most truths, be trite and hackneyed, no
little novelty remains to the search of the inquirer into the varieties of inimical import comprehended
in that malign monosyllable. For instance, I submit to the experienced that the degree of hostility
it betrays is in much proportioned to its collocation in the sentence. When, gliding indirectly
through the rest of the period, it takes its stand at the close, as in that "Charles dear" of
Mrs. Dale, it has spilled so much of its natural bitterness by the way that it assumes even
a smile, "amara lento temperet risu." Sometimes the smile is plaintive, sometimes arch. For
example:--

(Plaintive.) "I know very well that whatever I do is wrong, Charles dear."

"Nay, I am very glad you amused yourself so much without me, Charles dear."

"Not quite so loud! If you had but my poor head, Charles dear," etc.

(Arch.) "If you could spill the ink anywhere but on the best tablecloth, Charles dear!"

"But though you must always have your own way, you are not quite faultless, own, Charles dear,"
etc.

When the enemy stops in the middle of the sentence, its venom is naturally less exhausted. For
example:--

"Really, I must say, Charles dear, that you are the most fidgety person," etc.

"And if the house bills were so high last week, Charles dear, I should just like to know whose fault
it was--that's all."

"But you know, Charles dear, that you care no more for me and the children than--" etc.

But if the fatal word spring up, in its primitive freshness, at the head of the sentence, bow
your head to the storm. It then assumes the majesty of "my" before it; it is generally more
than simple objurgation,--it prefaces a sermon. My candour obliges me to confess that this
is the mode in which the hateful monosyllable is more usually employed by the marital part of
the one flesh; and has something about it of the odious assumption of the Petruchian paterfamilias--the
head of the family-- boding, not perhaps "peace and love, and quiet life," but certainly "awful
rule and right supremacy." For example:--

"My dear Jane, I wish you would just put by that everlasting crochet, and listen to me for a
few moments," etc. "My dear Jane, I wish you would understand me for once; don't think I am angry,--no,
but I am hurt! You must consider," etc.

"My dear Jane, I don't know if it is your intention to ruin me; but I only wish you would do
as all other women do who care three straws for their husband's property," etc.

"My dear Jane, I wish you to understand that I am the last person in the world to be jealous; but
I'll be d---d if that puppy, Captain Prettyman," etc.

Now, few so carefully cultivate the connubial garden, as to feel much
surprise at the occasional sting of a homely nettle or two; but who
ever expected, before entering that garden, to find himself pricked
and lacerated by an insidious exotical "dear," which he had been taught
to believe only lived in a hothouse, along with myrtles and other
tender and sensitive shrubs which poets appropriate to Venus?

Nevertheless Parson Dale, being a patient man, and a pattern to all
husbands, would have found no fault with his garden, though there
had not been a single specimen of "dear,"--whether the dear /humilis/
or the dear /superba/; the dear /pallida, rubra/, or /nigra/; the
dear /suavis/ or the dear /horrida/,--no, not a single "dear" in the
whole horticulture of matrimony, which Mrs. Dale had not brought to
perfection.

But this was far from being the case; Mrs. Dale, living much in retirement, was unaware of the modern
improvements, in variety of colour and sharpness of prickle, which have rewarded the persevering skill
of our female florists.

CHAPTER IX.

In the cool of the evening Dr. Riccabocca walked home across the fields. Mr. and Mrs. Dale had
accompanied him half-way, and as they now turned back to the parsonage, they looked behind to catch
a glimpse of the tall, outlandish figure, winding slowly through the path amidst the waves of the green
corn.

"Poor man!" said Mrs. Dale, feelingly; "and the button was off his wristband! What a pity he has
nobody to take care of him!

He seems very domestic. Don't you think, Charles, it would be a great blessing if we could get
him a good wife?"

"Um," said the parson; "I doubt if he values the married state as he ought."

"What do you mean, Charles? I never saw a man more polite to ladies in my life."

"Yes, but--"

"But what? "You are always so mysterious, Charles dear."

"Mysterious! No, Carry; but if you could hear what the doctor says of the ladies sometimes."

"Ay,
when you men get together, my dear. I know what that means--pretty
things you say of us! But you are all alike; you know you are, love!"

"I
am sure," said the parson, simply, "that I have good cause to speak
well of the sex--when I think of you and my poor mother."

Mrs. Dale,
who, with all her "tempers," was an excellent woman, and loved her
husband with the whole of her quick little heart, was touched. She
pressed his hand, and did not call him dear all the way home.

Meanwhile
the Italian passed the fields, and came upon the high road about two
miles from Hazeldean. On one side stood an old-fashioned solitary
inn, such as English inns used to be before they became railway hotels,--square,
solid, old-fashioned, looking so hospitable and comfortable, with
their great signs swinging from some elm-tree in front, and the long
row of stables standing a little back, with a chaise or two in the
yard, and the jolly landlord talking of the crops to some stout farmer,
whose rough pony halts of itself at the well-known door. Opposite
this inn, on the other side of the road, stood the habitation of Dr.
Riecabocca.

A few years before the date of these annals, the stage-coach
on its way to London from a seaport town stopped at the inn, as was
its wont, for a good hour, that its passengers might dine like Christian
Englishmen--not gulp down a basin of scalding soup, like everlasting
heathen Yankees, with that cursed railway-whistle shrieking like a
fiend in their ears! It was the best dining-place on the whole road,
for the trout in the neighbouring rill were famous, and so was the
mutton which came from Hazeldean Park.

From the outside of the coach
had descended two passengers, who, alone insensible to the attractions
of mutton and trout, refused to dine,--two melancholy-looking foreigners,
of whom one was Signor Riccabocca, much the same as we see him now,
only that the black suit was less threadbare, the tall form less meagre,
and he did not then wear spectacles; and the other was his servant.
"They would walk about while the coach stopped." Now the Italian's
eye had been caught by a mouldering, dismantled house on the other
side the road, which nevertheless was well situated; half- way up
a green hill, with its aspect due south, a little cascade falling
down artificial rockwork, a terrace with a balustrade, and a few broken
urns and statues before its Ionic portico, while on the roadside stood
a board, with characters already half effaced, implying that the house
was "To be let unfurnished, with or without land."

The abode that
looked so cheerless, and which had so evidently hung long on hand,
was the property of Squire Hazeldean. It had been built by his grandfather
on the female side,--a country gentleman who had actually been in
Italy (a journey rare enough to boast of in those days), and who,
on his return home, had attempted a miniature imitation of an Italian
villa. He left an only daughter and sole heiress, who married Squire
Hazeldean's father; and since that time, the house, abandoned by its
proprietors for the larger residence of the Hazeldeans, had been uninhabited
and neglected. Several tenants, indeed, had offered themselves; but
your true country squire is slow in admitting upon his own property
a rival neighbour. Some wanted shooting. "That," said the Hazeldeans,
who were great sportsmen and strict preservers, "was quite out of
the question." Others were fine folks from London. "London servants,"
said the Hazeldeans, who were moral and prudent people, "would corrupt
their own, and bring London prices." Others, again, were retired manufacturers,
at whom the Hazeldeans turned up their agricultural noses. In short,
some were too grand, and others too vulgar. Some were refused because
they were known so well: "Friends were best at a distance," said the
Hazeldeans; others because they were not known at all: "No good comes
of strangers," said the Hazeldeans. And finally, as the house fell
more and more into decay, no one would take it unless it was put into
thorough repair: "As if one was made of money!" said the Hazeldeans.
In short, there stood the house unoccupied and ruinous; and there,
on its terrace, stood the two forlorn Italians, surveying it with
a smile at each other, as for the first time since they set foot in
England, they recognized, in dilapidated pilasters and broken statues,
in a weed-grown terrace and the remains of an orangery, something
that reminded them of the land they had left behind.

On returning
to the inn, Dr. Riccabocca took the occasion to learn from the innkeeper
(who was indeed a tenant of the squire) such particulars as he could
collect; and a few days afterwards Mr. Hazeldean received a letter
from a solicitor of repute in London, stating that a very respectable
foreign gentleman had commissioned him to treat for Clump Lodge, otherwise
called the "Casino;" that the said gentleman did not shoot, lived
in great seclusion, and, having no family, did not care about the
repairs of the place, provided only it were made weather- proof,--if
the omission of more expensive reparations could render the rent suitable
to his finances, which were very limited. The offer came at a fortunate
moment, when the steward had just been representing to the squire
the necessity of doing something to keep the Casino from falling into
positive ruin, and the squire was cursing the fates which had put
the Casino into an entail--so that he could not pull it down for the
building materials. Mr. Hazeldean therefore caught at the proposal
even as a fair lady, who has refused the best offers in the kingdom,
catches, at last, at some battered old captain on half-pay, and replied
that, as for rent, if the solicitor's client was a quiet, respectable
man, he did not care for that, but that the gentleman might have it
for the first year rent-free, on condition of paying the taxes, and
putting the place a little in order. If they suited each other, they
could then come to terms. Ten days subsequently to this gracious reply,
Signor Riccabocca and his servant arrived; and, before the year's
end, the squire was so contented with his tenant that he gave him
a running lease of seven, fourteen, or twenty-one years, at a rent
merely nominal, on condition that Signor Riccabocca would put and
maintain the place in repair, barring the roof and fences, which the
squire generously renewed at his own expense. He was a very poor man, with nothing of his own but a little
farm of seven acres, and the person whom he had employed to cultivate it had died in his absence;
a hired laborer had undertaken the care of it, but had been unfaithful, and had run away with
his tools and his cattle; so that he was afraid that, unless he could return quickly, his wife
and children would starve. However, the Senate engaged to provide for his family, and he remained,
making expeditions into the country round, in the course of which the Romans really did fall
in with a serpent as monstrous as their imagination had depicted. It was said to be 120 feet
long, and dwelt upon the banks of the River Bagrada, where it used to devour the Roman soldiers
as they went to fetch water. It had such tough scales that they were obliged to attack it with
their engines meant for battering city walls, and only succeeded with much difficulty in destroying
it.

The country was most beautiful, covered with fertile cornfields and full of rich fruit trees,
and all the rich Carthaginians had country houses and gardens, which were made delicious with
fountains, trees, and flowers. The Roman soldiers, plain, hardy, fierce, and pitiless, did,
it must be feared, cruel damage among these peaceful scenes; they boasted of having sacked
300 villages, and mercy was not yet known to them. The Carthaginian army, though strong in
horsemen and in elephants, kept upon the hills and did nothing to save the country, and the
wild desert tribes of Numidians came rushing in to plunder what the Romans had left. The Carthaginians
sent to offer terms of peace; but Regulus, who had become uplifted by his conquests, made such
demands that the messengers remonstrated. He answered, 'Men who are good for anything should
either conquer or submit to their betters;' and he sent them rudely away, like a stern old
Roman as he was. His merit was that he had no more mercy on himself than on others.

The Carthaginians were driven to extremity, and made horrible offerings to Moloch, giving the
little children of the noblest families to be dropped into the fire between the brazen hands
of his statue, and grown- up people of the noblest families rushed in of their own accord,
hoping thus to propitiate their gods, and obtain safety for their country. Their time was not
yet fully come, and a respite was granted to them. They had sent, in their distress, to hire
soldiers in Greece, and among these came a Spartan, named Xanthippus, who at once took the
command, and led the army out to battle, with a long line of elephants ranged in front of them,
and with clouds of horsemen hovering on the wings. The Romans had not yet learnt the best mode
of fighting with elephants, namely, to leave lanes in their columns where these huge beasts
might advance harmlessly; instead of which, the ranks were thrust and trampled down by the
creatures' bulk, and they suffered a terrible defeat; Regulus himself was seized by the horsemen,
and dragged into Carthage, where the victors feasted and rejoiced through half the night, and
testified their thanks to Moloch by offering in his fires the bravest of their captives.

Regulus himself was not, however, one of these victims. He was kept a close prisoner for two
years, pining and sickening in his loneliness, while in the meantime the war continued, and
at last a victory so decisive was gained by the Romans, that the people of Carthage were discouraged,
and resolved to ask terms of peace. They thought that no one would be so readily listened to
at Rome as Regulus, and they therefore sent him there with their envoys, having first made
him swear that he would come back to his prison if there should neither be peace nor an exchange
of prisoners. They little knew how much more a true- hearted Roman cared for his city than
for himself--for his word than for his life.

Worn and dejected, the captive warrior came to the outside of the gates of his own city, and
there paused, refusing to enter. 'I am no longer a Roman citizen,' he said; 'I am but the barbarian's
slave, and the Senate may not give audience to strangers within the walls.'

His wife Marcia ran out to greet him, with his two sons, but he did not look up, and received
their caresses as one beneath their notice, as a mere slave, and he continued, in spite of
all entreaty, to remain outside the city, and would not even go to the little farm he had loved
so well.

The Roman Senate, as he would not come in to them, came out to hold their meeting in the Campagna.

The ambassadors spoke first, then Regulus, standing up, said, as one repeating a task, 'Conscript
fathers, being a slave to the Carthaginians, I come on the part of my masters to treat with
you concerning peace, and an exchange of prisoners.' He then turned to go away with the ambassadors,
as a stranger might not be present at the deliberations of the Senate. His old friends pressed
him to stay and give his opinion as a senator who had twice been consul; but he refused to
degrade that dignity by claiming it, slave as he was. But, at the command of his Carthaginian
masters, he remained, though not taking his seat.

Then he spoke. He told the senators to persevere in the war. He said he had seen the distress
of Carthage, and that a peace would only be to her advantage, not to that of Rome, and therefore
he strongly advised that the war should continue. Then, as to the exchange of prisoners, the
Carthaginian generals, who were in the hands of the Romans, were in full health and strength,
whilst he himself was too much broken down to be fit for service again, and indeed he believed
that his enemies had given him a slow poison, and that he could not live long. Thus he insisted
that no exchange of prisoners should be made.

It was wonderful, even to Romans, to hear a man thus pleading against himself, and their chief
priest came forward, and declared that, as his oath had been wrested from him by force, he
was not bound to return to his captivity. But Regulus was too noble to listen to this for a
moment. 'Have you resolved to dishonor me?' he said. His wife wept and entreated in vain that
they would detain him; they could merely repeat their permission to him to remain; but nothing
could prevail with him to break his word, and he turned back to the chains and death he expected
so calmly as if he had been returning to his home. This was in the year B.C. 249.

'Let the gods take care of the rest,' said the Roman; the gods whom alone he knew, and through
whom he ignorantly worshipped the true God, whose Light was shining out even in this heathen's
truth and constancy. How his trust was fulfilled is not known. The Senate, after the next victory,
gave two Carthaginian generals to his wife and sons to hold as pledges for his good treatment;
but when tidings arrived that Regulus was dead, Marcia began to treat them both with savage
cruelty, though one of them assured her that he had been careful to have her husband well used.
Horrible stories were told that Regulus had been put out in the sun with his eyelids cut off,
rolled down a hill in a barrel with spikes, killed by being constantly kept awake, or else
crucified. Marcia seems to have set about, and perhaps believed in these horrors, and avenged
them on her unhappy captives till one had died, and the Senate sent for her sons and severely
reprimanded them. They declared it was their mother's doing, not theirs, and thenceforth were
careful of the comfort of the remaining prisoner.

It may thus be hoped that the frightful tale of Regulus' sufferings was but formed by report
acting on the fancy of a vindictive woman, and that Regulus was permitted to die in peace of
the disease brought on far more probably by the climate and imprisonment, than by the poison
to which he ascribed it. It is not the tortures he may have endured that make him one of the
noblest characters of history, but the resolution that would neither let him save himself at
the risk of his country's prosperity, nor forfeit the word that he had pledged.

THE BRAVE BRETHREN OF JUDAH

B.C. 180

It was about 180 years before the Christian era. The Jews had long since come home from Babylon,
and built up their city and Temple at Jerusalem. But they were not free as they had been before.
Their country belonged to some greater power, they had a foreign governor over them, and had
to pay tribute to the king who was their master.

At the time we are going to speak of, this king was Antiochus Epiphanes, King of Syria. He
was descended from one of those generals who, upon the death of Alexander the Great, had shared
the East between them, and he reigned over all the country from the Mediterranean Sea even
into Persia and the borders of India. He spoke Greek, and believed in both the Greek and Roman
gods, for he had spent some time at Rome in his youth; but in his Eastern kingdom he had learnt
all the self-indulgent and violent habits to which people in those hot countries are especially
tempted.

He was so fierce and passionate, that he was often called the 'Madman', and he was very cruel
to all who offended him. One of his greatest desires was, that the Jews should leave their
true faith in one God, and do like the Greeks and Syrians, his other subjects, worship the
same idols, and hold drunken feasts in their honor. Sad to say, a great many of the Jews had
grown ashamed of their own true religion and the strict ways of their law, and thought them
old-fashioned. They joined in the Greek sports, played games naked in the theatre, joined in
riotous processions, carrying ivy in honor of Bacchus, the god of wine, and offered incense
to the idols; and the worst of all these was the false high priest, Menelaus, who led the King
Antiochus into the Temple itself, even into the Holy of Holies, and told him all that would
most desecrate it and grieve the Jews. So a little altar to the Roman god Jupiter was set up
on the top of the great brazen altar of burnt offerings, a hog was offered up, and broth of
its flesh sprinkled everywhere in the Temple; then all the precious vessels were seized, the
shewbread table of gold, the candlesticks, and the whole treasury, and carried away by the
king; the walls were thrown down, and the place made desolate.

Some Jews were still faithful to their God, but they were horribly punished and tortured to
death before the eyes of the king; and when at last he went away to his own country, taking
with him the wicked high priest Menelaus, he left behind him a governor and an army of soldiers
stationed in the tower of Acra, which overlooked the Temple hill, and sent for an old man from
Athens to teach the people the heathen rites and ceremonies. Any person who observed the Sabbath
day, or any other ordinance of the law of Moses, was put to death in a most cruel manner; all
the books of the Old Testament Scripture that could be found were either burnt or defiled,
by having pictures of Greek gods painted upon them; and the heathen priests went from place
to place, with a little brazen altar and image and a guard of soldiers, who were to kill every
person who refused to burn incense before the idol. It was the very saddest time that the Jews
had ever known, and there seemed no help near or far off; they could have no hope, except in
the promises that God would never fail His people, or forsake His inheritance, and in the prophecies
that bad times should come, but good ones after them.

The Greeks, in going through the towns to enforce the idol worship, came to a little city called
Modin, somewhere on the hills on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, not far from Joppa. There
they sent out, as usual, orders to all the men of the town to meet them in the marketplace;
but they were told beforehand, that the chief person in the place was an old man named Mattathias,
of a priestly family, and so much respected, that all the other inhabitants of the place were
sure to do whatever he might lead them in. So the Greeks sent for him first of all, and he
came at their summons, a grand and noble old man, followed by his five sons, Johanan, Simon,
Judas, Jonathan, and Eleazar. The Greek priest tried to talk him over. He told him that the
high priest had forsaken the Jewish superstition, that the Temple was in ruins, and that resistance
was in vain; and exhorted him to obtain gratitude and honor for himself, by leading his countrymen
in thus adoring the deities of the king's choice, promising him rewards and treasures if he
would comply.

But the old man spoke out with a loud and fearless voice: 'Though all the nations that are
under the king's dominion obey him, and fall away every one from the religion of their fathers,
and give consent to his commandments; yet will I and my sons and my brethren walk in the covenant
of our fathers. God forbid that we should forsake the law and the ordinances! We will not hearken
to the king's words, to go from our religion, either on the right hand or the left!'

As he spoke, up came an apostate Jew to do sacrifice at the heathen altar. Mattathias trembled
at the sight, and his zeal broke forth. He slew the offender, and his brave sons gathering
round him, they attacked the Syrian soldiers, killed the commissioner, and threw down the altar.
Then, as they knew that they could not there hold out against the king's power, Mattathias
proclaimed throughout the city: 'Whosoever is zealous of the law, and maintaineth the covenant,
let him follow me!' With that, he and his five sons, with their families, left their houses
and lands, and drove their cattle with them up into the wild hills and caves, where David had
once made his home; and all the Jews who wished to be still faithful, gathered around them,
to worship God and keep His commandments.

There they were, a handful of brave men in the mountains, and all the heathen world and apostate
Jews against them. They used to come down into the villages, remind the people of the law,
promise their help, and throw down any idol altars that they found, and the enemy never were
able to follow them into their rocky strongholds. But the old Mattathias could not long bear
the rude wild life in the cold mountains, and he soon died. First he called all his five sons,
and bade them to 'be zealous for the law, and give their lives for the covenant of their fathers';
and he reminded them of all the many brave men who had before served God, and been aided in
their extremity. He appointed his son Judas, as the strongest and mightiest, to lead his brethren
to battle, and Simon, as the wisest, to be their counsellor; then he blessed them and died;
and his sons were able to bury him in the tomb of his fathers at Modin.

Judas was one of the bravest men who ever lived; never dreading the numbers that came against
him. He was surnamed Maccabeus, which some people say meant the hammerer; but others think
it was made up of the first letters of the words he carried on his banner, which meant 'Who
is like unto Thee, among the gods, O Lord?' Altogether he had about six thousand men round
him when the Greek governor, Apollonius, came out to fight with him. The Jews gained here their
first victory, and Judas killed Apollonius, took his sword, and fought all his other battles
with it. Next came a captain called Seron, who went out to the hills to lay hold of the bold
rebels that dared to rise against the King of Syria. The place where Judas met him was one
to make the Jews' hearts leap with hope and trust. It was on the steep stony broken hillside
of Beth-horon, the very place where Joshua had conquered the five kings of the Amorites, in
the first battle on the coming in of the children of Israel to Palestine. There was the rugged
path where Joshua had stood and called out to the sun to stand still in Gibeon, and the moon
in the valley of Ajalon. Miracles were over, and Judas looked for no wonder to help him; but
when he came up the mountain road from Joppa, his heart was full of the same trust as Joshua's,
and he won another great victory.

By this time King Antiochus began to think the rising of the Jews a serious matter, but he
could not come himself against them, because his provinces in Armenia and Persia had refused
their tribute, and he had to go in person to reduce them. He appointed, however, a governor,
named Lysias, to chastise the Jews, giving him an army of 40,000 foot and 7000 horse. Half
of these Lysias sent on before him, with two captains, named Nicanor and Gorgias, thinking
that these would be more than enough to hunt down and crush the little handful that were lurking
in the hills. And with them came a great number of slave merchants, who had bargained with
Nicanor that they should have ninety Jews for one talent, to sell to the Greeks and Romans,
by whom Jewish slaves were much esteemed.

There was great terror in Palestine at these tidings, and many of the weaker-minded fell away
from Judas; but he called all the faithful together at Mizpeh, the same place where, 1000 years
before, Samuel had collected the Israelites, and, after prayer and fasting, had sent them forth
to free their country from the Philistines. Shiloh, the sanctuary, was then lying desolate,
just as Jerusalem now lay in ruins; and yet better times had come. But very mournful was that
fast day at Mizpeh, as the Jews looked along the hillside to their own holy mountain crowned
by no white marble and gold Temple flashing back the sunbeams, but only with the tall castle
of their enemies towering over the precipice. They could not sacrifice, because a sacrifice
could only be made at Jerusalem, and the only book of the Scriptures that they had to read
from was painted over with the hateful idol figures of the Greeks. And the huge army of enemies
was ever coming nearer! The whole assembly wept, and put on sackcloth and prayed aloud for
help, and then there was a loud sounding of trumpets, and Judas stood forth before them. And
he made the old proclamation that Moses had long ago decreed, that no one should go out to
battle who was building a house, or planting a vineyard, or had just betrothed a wife, or who
was fearful and faint- hearted. All these were to go home again. Judas had 6,000 followers
when he made this proclamation. He had only 3,000 at the end of the day, and they were but
poorly armed. He told them of the former aid that had come to their fathers in extremity, and
made them bold with his noble words. Then he gave them for their watchword 'the help of God',
and divided the leadership of the band between himself and his brothers, appointing Eleazar,
the youngest, to read the Holy Book.

With these valiant men, Judas set up his camp; but tidings were soon brought him that Gorgias,
with 5000 foot and 1000 horse, had left the main body to fall on his little camp by night.
He therefore secretly left the place in the twilight; so that when the enemy attacked his camp,
they found it deserted, and supposing them to be hid in the mountains, proceeded hither in
pursuit of them.

But in the early morning Judas and his 3,000 men were all in battle array in the plains, and
marching full upon the enemy's camp with trumpet sound, took them by surprise in the absence
of Gorgias and his choice troops, and utterly defeated and put them to flight, but without
pursuing them, since the fight with Gorgias and his 5,000 might be yet to come. Even as Judas
was reminding his men of this, Gorgias's troops were seen looking down from the mountains where
they had been wandering all night; but seeing their own camp all smoke and flame, they turned
and fled away. Nine thousand of the invaders had been slain, and the whole camp, full of arms
and treasures, was in the hands of Judas, who there rested for a Sabbath of glad thanksgiving,
and the next day parted the spoil, first putting out the share for the widows and orphans and
the wounded, and then dividing the rest among his warriors. As to the slave merchants, they
were all made prisoners, and instead of giving a talent for ninety Jews, were sold themselves.

The next year Lysias came himself, but was driven back and defeated at Bethshur, four or five
miles south of Bethlehem. And now came the saddest, yet the greatest, day of Judas's life,
when he ventured to go back into the holy city and take possession of the Temple again. The
strong tower of Acra, which stood on a ridge of Mount Moriah looking down on the Temple rock,
was still held by the Syrians, and he had no means of taking it; but he and his men loved the
sanctuary too well to keep away from it, and again they marched up the steps and slopes that
led up the holy hill. They went up to find the walls broken, the gates burnt, the cloisters
and priests' chambers pulled down, and the courts thickly grown with grass and shrubs, the
altar of their one true God with the false idol Jupiter's altar in the middle of it. These
warriors, who had turned three armies to flight, could not bear the sight. They fell down on
their faces, threw dust on their heads, and wept aloud for the desolation of their holy place.
But in the midst Judas caused the trumpets to sound an alarm. They were to do something besides
grieving. The bravest of them were set to keep watch and ward against the Syrians in the tower,
while he chose out the most faithful priests to cleanse out the sanctuary, and renew all that
could be renewed, making new holy vessels from the spoil taken in Nicanor's camp, and setting
the stones of the profaned altar apart while a new one was raised. On the third anniversary
of the great profanation, the Temple was newly dedicated, with songs and hymns of rejoicing,
and a festival day was appointed, which has been observed by the Jews ever since. The Temple
rock and city were again fortified so as to be able to hold out against their enemies, and
this year and the next were the most prosperous of the life of the loyal-hearted Maccabee.

The great enemy of the Jews, Antiochus Epiphanes, was in the meantime dying in great agony
in Persia, and his son Antiochus Eupator was set on the throne by Lysias, who brought him with
an enormous army to reduce the rising in Judea. The fight was again at Bethshur, where Judas
had built a strong fort on a point of rock that guarded the road to Hebron. Lysias tried to
take this fort, and Judas came to the rescue with his little army, to meet the far mightier
Syrian force, which was made more terrific by possessing thirty war elephants imported from
the Indian frontier. Each of these creatures carried a tower containing thirty-two men armed
with darts and javelins, and an Indian driver on his neck; and they had 1000 foot and 500 horse
attached to the special following of the beast, who, gentle as he was by nature, often produced
a fearful effect on the enemy; not so much by his huge bulk as by the terror he inspired among
men, and far more among horses. The whole host was spread over the mountains and the valleys
so that it is said that their bright armor and gold and silver shields made the mountains glisten
like lamps of fire.

Still Judas pressed on to the attack, and his brother Eleazar, perceiving that one of the elephants
was more adorned than the rest, thought it might be carrying the king, and devoted himself
for his country. He fought his way to the monster, crept under it, and stabbed it from beneath,
so that the mighty weight sank down on him and crushed him to death in his fall. He gained
a 'perpetual name' for valor and self-devotion; but the king was not upon the elephant, and
after a hard- fought battle, Judas was obliged to draw off and leave Bethshur to be taken by
the enemy, and to shut himself up in Jerusalem.

There, want of provisions had brought him to great distress, when tidings came that another
son of Antiochus Epiphanes had claimed the throne, and Lysias made peace in haste with Judas,
promising him full liberty of worship, and left Palestine in peace.

This did not, however, last long. Lysias and his young master were slain by the new king, Demetrius,
who again sent an army for the subjection of Judas, and further appointed a high priest, named
Alcimus, of the family of Aaron, but inclined to favor the new heathen fashions.

This was the most fatal thing that had happened to Judas. Though of the priestly line, he was
so much of a warrior, that he seems to have thought it would be profane to offer sacrifice
himself; and many of the Jews were so glad of another high priest, that they let Alcimus into
the Temple, and Jerusalem was again lost to Judas. One more battle was won by him at Beth-horon,
and then finding how hard it was to make head against the Syrians, he sent to ask the aid of
the great Roman power. But long before the answer could come, a huge Syrian army had marched
in on the Holy Land, 20,000 men, and Judas had again no more than 3000. Some had gone over
to Alcimus, some were offended at his seeking Roman alliance, and when at Eleasah he came in
sight of the host, his men's hearts failed more than they ever had done before, and, out of
the 3000 at first collected, only 800 stood with him, and they would fain have persuaded him
to retreat.

'God forbid that I should do this thing,' he said, 'and flee away from them. If our time be
come, let us die manfully for our brethren, and let us not stain our honor.'

Sore was the battle, as sore as that waged by the 800 at Thermopylae, and the end was the same.
Judas and his 800 were not driven from the field, but lay dead upon it. But their work was
done. What is called the moral effect of such a defeat goes further than many a victory. Those
lives, sold so dearly, were the price of freedom for Judea.

Judas's brothers Jonathan and Simon laid him in his father's tomb, and then ended the work
that he had begun; and when Simon died, the Jews, once so trodden on, were the most prosperous
race in the East. The Temple was raised from its ruins, and the exploits of the Maccabees had
nerved the whole people to do or die in defense of the holy faith of their fathers.

THE CHIEF OF THE ARVERNI

B.C. 52

We have seen the Gauls in the heart of Rome, we have now to see them showing the last courage
of despair, defending their native lands against the greatest of all the conquerors that Rome
ever sent forth.

These lands, where they had dwelt for so many years as justly to regard them as their inheritance,
were Gaul. There the Celtic race had had their abode ever since history has spoken clearly,
and had become, in Gaul especially, slightly more civilized from intercourse with the Greek
colony at Massilia, or Marseilles. But they had become borderers upon the Roman dominions,
and there was little chance that they would not be absorbed; the tribes of Provence, the first
Roman province, were already conquered, others were in alliance with Rome, and some had called
in the Romans to help them fight their battles. There is no occasion to describe the seven
years' war by which Julius Caesar added Gaul to the provinces claimed by Rome, and when he
visited Britain; such conquests are far from being Golden Deeds, but are far worthier of the
iron age. It is the stand made by the losing party, and the true patriotism of one young chieftain,
that we would wish here to dwell upon.

In the sixth year of the war the conquest seemed to have been made, and the Roman legions were
guarding the north and west, while Caesar himself had crossed the Alps. Subjection pressed
heavily on the Gauls, some of their chiefs had been put to death, and the high spirit of the
nation was stirred. Meetings took place between the warriors of the various tribes, and an
oath was taken by those who inhabited the centre of the country, that if they once revolted,
they would stand by one another to the last. These Gauls were probably not tall, bony giants,
like the pillagers of Rome; their appearance and character would be more like that of the modern
Welsh, or of their own French descendants, small, alert, and dark-eyed, full of fire, but,
though fierce at the first onset, soon rebuffed, yet with much perseverance in the long run.
Their worship was conducted by Druids, like that of the Britons, and their dress was of checked
material, formed into a loose coat and wide trousers. The superior chiefs, who had had any
dealings with Rome, would speak a little Latin, and have a few Roman weapons as great improvements
upon their own. Their fortifications were wonderfully strong. Trunks of trees were laid on
the ground at two feet apart, so that the depth of the wall was their full length. Over these
another tier of beams was laid crosswise, and the space between was filled up with earth, and
the outside faced with large stones; the building of earth and stone was carried up to some
height, then came another tier of timbers, crossed as before, and this was repeated again to
a considerable height, the inner ends of the beams being fastened to a planking within the
wall, so that the whole was of immense compactness. Fire could not damage the mineral part
of the construction, nor the battering ram hurt the wood, and the Romans had been often placed
in great difficulties by these rude but admirable constructions, within which the Gauls placed
their families and cattle, building huts for present shelter. Of late, some attempts had been
made at copying the regular streets and houses built round courts that were in use among the
Romans, and Roman colonies had been established in various places, where veteran soldiers had
received grants of land on condition of keeping the natives in check. A growing taste for arts
and civilization was leading to Romans of inferior classes settling themselves in other Gallic
cities.

The first rising of the Gauls began by a quarrel at the city we now call Orleans, ending in
a massacre of all the Romans there. The tidings were spread through all the country by loud
shouts, repeated from one to the other by men stationed on every hill, and thus, what had been
done at Orleans at sunrise was known by nine at night 160 miles off among the mountains, which
were then the homes of a tribe called by the Romans the Arverni, who have left their name to
the province of Auvergne.

Here dwelt a young chieftain, probably really called Fearcuincedorigh, or Man who is chief
of a hundred heads, known to us by Caesar's version of his name, as Vercingetorix, a high-spirited
youth, who keenly felt the servitude of his country, and who, on receiving these tidings, instantly
called on his friends to endeavor to shake off the yoke. His uncle, who feared to provoke Roman
vengeance, expelled him from the chief city, Gergovia, the remains of which may be traced on
the mountain still called Gergoie, about six miles from Clermont; but he collected all the
younger and more high-spirited men, forced a way into the city, and was proclaimed chief of
his tribe. All the neighboring tribes joined in the league against the common enemy, and tidings
were brought to Caesar that the whole country round the Loire was in a state of revolt.

In the heart of winter he hurried back, and took the Gauls by surprise by crossing the snows
that lay thick on the wild waste of the Cebenna, which the Arverni had always considered as
their impenetrable barrier throughout the winter. The towns quickly fell into his hands, and
he was rapidly recovering all he had lost, when Vercingetorix, collecting his chief supporters,
represented to them that their best hope would be in burning all the inhabited places themselves
and driving off all the cattle, then lying in wait to cut off all the convoys of provisions
that should be sent to the enemy, and thus starving them into a retreat. He said that burning
houses were indeed a grievous sight, but it would be more grievous to see their wives and children
dragged into captivity. To this all the allies agreed, and twenty towns in one district were
burnt in a single day; but when they came to the city of Avaricum, now called Bourges, the
tribe of Bituriges, to whom it belonged, entreated on their knees not to be obliged to destroy
the most beautiful city in the country, representing that, as it had a river on one side, and
a morass everywhere else, except at a very narrow entrance, it might be easily held out against
the enemy, and to their entreaties Vercingetorix yielded, though much against his own judgment.

Caesar laid siege to the place, but his army suffered severely from cold and hunger; they had
no bread at all, and lived only on the cattle driven in from distant villages, while Vercingetorix
hovered round, cutting off their supplies. They however labored diligently to raise a mount
against a wall of the town; but as fast as they worked, the higher did the Gauls within raise
the stages of their rampart, and for twenty- five days there was a most brave defense; but
at last the Romans made their entrance, and slaughtered all they found there, except 800, who
escaped to the camp of Vercingetorix. He was not disconcerted by this loss, which he had always
expected, but sheltered and clothed the fugitives, and raised a great body of archers and of
horsemen, with whom he returned to his own territory in Auvergne. There was much fighting around
the city of Gergovia; but at length, owing to the revolt of the Aedui, another Gallic tribe,
Caesar was forced to retreat over the Loire; and the wild peaks of volcanic Auvergne were free
again.

But no gallant resolution could long prevail against the ever-advancing power of Rome, and
at length the Gauls were driven into their fortified camp at Alesia, now called Alise [footnote:
In Burgundy, between Semur and Dijon.], a city standing on a high hill, with two rivers flowing
round its base, and a plain in front about three miles wide. Everywhere else it was circled
in by high hills, and here Caesar resolved to shut these brave men in and bring them to bay.
He caused his men to begin that mighty system of earthworks by which the Romans carried on
their attacks, compassing their victim round on every side with a deadly slowness and sureness,
by those broad ditches and terraced ramparts that everywhere mark where their foot of iron
was trod. Eleven miles round did this huge rampart extend, strengthened by three-and-twenty
redoubts, or places of defense, where a watch was continually kept. Before the lines were complete,
Vercingetorix brought out his cavalry, and gave battle, at one time with a hope of success;
but the enemy were too strong for him, and his horsemen were driven into the camp. He then
resolved to send home all of these, since they could be of no use in the camp, and had better
escape before the ditch should have shut them in on every side. He charged them to go to their
several tribes and endeavor to assemble all the fighting men to come to his rescue; for, if
he were not speedily succored, he and 80,000 of the bravest of the Gauls must fall into the
hands of the Romans, since he had only corn for thirty days, even with the utmost saving.

Having thus exhorted them, he took leave of them, and sent them away at nine at night, so that
they might escape in the dark where the Roman trench had not yet extended. Then he distributed
the cattle among his men, but retained the corn himself, serving it out with the utmost caution.
The Romans outside fortified their camp with a double ditch, one of them full of water, behind
which was a bank twelve feet high, with stakes forked like the horns of a stag. The space between
the ditches was filled with pits, and scattered with iron caltrops or hooked spikes. All this
was against the garrison, to prevent them from breaking out; and outside the camp he made another
line of ditches and ramparts against the Gauls who might be coming to the rescue.

The other tribes were not deaf to the summons of their friends, but assembled in large numbers,
and just as the besieged had exhausted their provisions, an army was seen on the hills beyond
the camp. Their commander was Vergosillaunus (most probably Fearsaighan, the Man of the Standard),
a near kinsman of Vercingetorix; and all that bravery could do, they did to break through the
defenses of the camp from outside, while within, Vercingetorix and his 80,000 tried to fill
up the ditches, and force their way out to meet their friends. But Caesar himself commanded
the Romans, who were confident in his fortunes, and raised a shout of ecstasy wherever they
beheld his thin, marked, eagle face and purple robe, rushing on the enemy with a confidence
of victory that did in fact render them invincible. The Gauls gave way, lost seventy-four of
their standards, and Vergosillaunus himself was taken a prisoner; and as for the brave garrison
within Alesia, they were but like so many flies struggling in vain within the enormous web
that had been woven around them. Hope was gone, but the chief of the Arverni could yet do one
thing for his countrymen--he could offer up himself in order to obtain better terms for them.

The next day he convened his companions in arms, and told them that he had only fought for
the freedom of their country, not to secure his private interest; and that now, since yield
they must, he freely offered himself to become a victim for their safety, whether they should
judge it best for themselves to appease the anger of the conqueror by putting him to death
themselves, or whether they preferred giving him up alive.

It was a piteous necessity to have to sacrifice their noblest and bravest, who had led them
so gallantly during the long war; but they had little choice, and could only send messengers
to the camp to offer to yield Vercingetorix as the price of their safety. Caesar made it known
that he was willing to accept their submission, and drawing up his troops in battle array,
with the Eagle standards around him, he watched the whole Gallic army march past him. First,
Vercingetorix was placed as a prisoner in his hands, and then each man lay down sword, javelin,
or bow and arrows, helmet, buckler and breastplate, in one mournful heap, and proceeded on
his way, scarcely thankful that the generosity of their chieftain had purchased for them subjection
rather than death.

Vercingetorix himself had become the property of the great man from whom alone we know of his
deeds; who could perceive his generous spirit and high qualities as a general, nay, who honored
the self-devotion by which he endeavored to save his countrymen. He remained in captivity--six
long years sped by--while Caesar passed the Rubicon, fought out his struggle for power at Rome,
and subdued Egypt, Pontus, and Northern Africa--and all the time the brave Gaul remained closely
watched and guarded, and with no hope of seeing the jagged peaks and wild valleys of his own
beautiful Auvergne. For well did he, like every other marked foe of Rome, know for what he
was reserved, and no doubt he yielded himself in the full expectation of that fate which many
a man, as brave as he, had escaped by self-destruction.

The day came at last. In July, B.C. 45, the victorious Caesar had leisure to celebrate his
victories in four grand triumphs, all in one month, and that in honor of the conquest of Gaul
came the first. The triumphal gate of Rome was thrown wide open, every house was decked with
hangings of silk and tapestry, the household images of every family, dressed with fresh flowers,
were placed in their porches, those of the gods stood on the steps of the temples, and in marched
the procession, the magistrates first in their robes of office, and then the trumpeters. Next
came the tokens of the victory--figures of the supposed gods of the two great rivers, Rhine
and Rhone, and even of the captive Ocean, made in gold, were carried along, with pictures framed
in citron wood, showing the scenes of victory--the wild waste of the Cevennes, the steep peaks
of Auvergne, the mighty camp of Alesia; nay, there too would be the white cliffs of Dover,
and the struggle with the Britons on the beach. Models in wood and ivory showed the fortifications
of Avaricum, and of many another city; and here too were carried specimens of the olives and
vines, and other curious plants of the newly won land; here was the breastplate of British
pearls that Caesar dedicated to Venus. A band of flute-players followed, and then came the
white oxen that were to be sacrificed, their horns gilded and flowers hung round them, the
sacrificing priests with wreathed heads marching with them. Specimens of bears and wolves from
the woods and mountains came next in order, and after them waved for the last time the national
ensigns of the many tribes of Gaul. Once more Vercingetorix and Vergosillaunus saw their own
Arvernian standard, and marched behind it with the noblest of their clan: once more they wore
their native dress and well-tried armor. But chains were on their hands and feet, and the men
who had fought so long and well for freedom, were the captive gazing-stock of Rome. Long, long
was the line of chained Gauls of every tribe, before the four white horses appeared, all abreast,
drawing the gilded car, in which stood a slight form in a purple robe, with the bald head and
narrow temples encircled with a wreath of bay, the thin cheeks tinted with vermilion, the eager
aquiline face and narrow lips gravely composed to Roman dignity, and the quick eye searching
out what impression the display was making on the people. Over his head a slave held a golden
crown, but whispered, 'Remember that thou too art a man.' And in following that old custom,
how little did the victor know that, bay-crowned like himself, there followed close behind,
in one of the chariots of the officers, the man whose dagger-thrust would, two years later,
be answered by his dying word of reproach! The horsemen of the army followed, and then the
legions, every spear wreathed, every head crowned with bay, so that an evergreen grove might
have seemed marching through the Roman streets, but for the war songs, and the wild jests,
and ribald ballads that custom allowed the soldiers to shout out, often in pretended mockery
of their own victorious general, the Imperator.

The victor climbed the Capitol steps, and laid his wreath of bay on Jupiter's knees, the white
oxen were sacrificed, and the feast began by torchlight. Where was the vanquished? He was led
to the dark prison vault in the side of Capitoline hill, and there one sharp sword-thrust ended
the gallant life and long captivity.

It was no special cruelty in Julius Caesar. Every Roman triumph was stained by the slaughter
of the most distinguished captives, after the degradation of walking in chains had been undergone.
He had spirit to appreciate Vercingetorix, but had not nobleness to spare him from the ordinary
fate. Yet we may doubt which, in true moral greatness, was the superior in that hour of triumph,
the conqueror who trod down all that he might minister to his own glory, or the conquered,
who, when no resistance had availed, had voluntarily confronted shame and death in hopes to
win pardon and safety for his comrades.

WITHSTANDING THE MONARCH IN HIS WRATH

A.D. 389

When a monarch's power is unchecked by his people, there is only One to whom he believes himself
accountable; and if he have forgotten the dagger of Damocles, or if he be too high-spirited
to regard it, then that Higher One alone can restrain his actions. And there have been times
when princes have so broken the bounds of right, that no hope remains of recalling them to
their duty save by the voice of the ministers of God upon Earth. But as these ministers bear
no charmed life, and are subjects themselves of the prince, such rebukes have been given at
the utmost risk of liberty and life.

Thus it was that though Nathan, unharmed, showed David his sin, and Elijah, the wondrous prophet
of Gilead, was protected from Jezebel's fury, when he denounced her and her husband Ahab for
the idolatry of Baal and the murder of Naboth; yet no Divine hand interposed to shield Zachariah,
the son of Jehoiada, the high priest, when he rebuked the apostasy of his cousin, Jehoash,
King of Judah, and was stoned to death by the ungrateful king's command in that very temple
court where Jehoiada and his armed Levites had encountered the savage usurping Athaliah, and
won back the kingdom for the child Jehoash. And when 'in the spirit and power of Elijah', St.
John the Baptist denounced the sin of Herod Antipas in marrying his brother Philip's wife,
he bore the consequences to the utmost, when thrown into prison and then beheaded to gratify
the rage of the vindictive woman.

Since Scripture Saints in the age of miracles were not always shielded from the wrath of kings,
Christian bishops could expect no special interposition in their favor, when they stood forth
to stop the way of the sovereign's passions, and to proclaim that the cause of mercy, purity,
and truth is the cause of God.

The first of these Christian bishops was Ambrose, the sainted prelate of Milan. It was indeed
a Christian Emperor whom he opposed, no other than the great Theodosius, but it was a new and
unheard-of thing for any voice to rebuke an Emperor of Rome, and Theodosius had proved himself
a man of violent passions.

The fourth century was a time when races and all sorts of shows were the fashion, nay, literally
the rage; for furious quarrels used to arise among the spectators who took the part of one
or other of the competitors, and would call themselves after their colours, the Blues or the
Greens. A favorite chariot driver, who had excelled in these races at Thessalonica, was thrown
into prison for some misdemeanor by Botheric, the Governor of Illyria, and his absence so enraged
the Thessalonican mob, that they rose in tumult, and demanded his restoration. On being refused,
they threw such a hail of stones that the governor himself and some of his officers were slain.

Theodosius might well be displeased, but his rage passed all bounds. He was at Milan at the
time, and at first Ambrose so worked on his feelings as to make him promise to temper justice
with mercy; but afterwards fresh accounts of the murder, together with the representations
of his courtier Rufinus, made him resolve not to relent, and he sent off messengers commanding
that there should be a general slaughter of all the race-going Thessalonicans, since all were
equally guilty of Botheric's death. He took care that his horrible command should be kept a
secret from Ambrose, and the first that the Bishop heard of it was the tidings that 7,000 persons
had been killed in the theatre, in a massacre lasting three hours!

There was no saving these lives, but Ambrose felt it his duty to make the Emperor feel his
sin, in hopes of saving others. Besides, it was not consistent with the honor of God to receive
at his altar a man reeking with innocent blood. The Bishop, however, took time to consider;
he went into the country for a few days, and thence wrote a letter to the Emperor, telling
him that thus stained with crime, he could not be admitted to the Holy Communion, nor received
into church. Still the Emperor does not seem to have believed he could be really withstood
by any subject, and on Ambrose's return, he found the imperial procession, lictors, guards,
and all, escorting the Emperor as usual to the Basilica or Justice Hall, that had been turned
into a church. Then to the door came the Bishop and stood in the way, forbidding the entrance,
and announcing that there, at least, sacrilege should not be added to murder.

'Nay,' said the Emperor, 'did not holy King David commit both murder and adultery, yet was
he not received again?'

'If you have sinned like him, repent like him,' answered Ambrose.

Theodosius turned away, troubled. He was great enough not to turn his anger against the Bishop;
he felt that he had sinned, and that the chastisement was merited, and he went back to his
palace weeping, and there spent eight months, attending to his duties of state, but too proud
to go through the tokens of penitence that the discipline of the Church had prescribed before
a great sinner could be received back into the congregation of the faithful. Easter was the
usual time for reconciling penitents, and Ambrose was not inclined to show any respect of persons,
or to excuse the Emperor from a penance he would have imposed on any offender. However, Rufinus
could not believe in such disregard, and thought all would give way to the Emperor's will.
Christmas had come, but for one man at Milan there were no hymns, no shouts of 'glad tidings!'
no midnight festival, no rejoicing that 'to us a Child is born; to us a Son is given'. The
Basilica was thronged with worshippers and rang with their Amens, resounding like thunder,
and their echoing song--the Te Deum--then their newest hymn of praise. But the lord of all
those multitudes was alone in his palace. He had not shown good will to man; he had not learnt
mercy and peace from the Prince of Peace; and the door was shut upon him. He was a resolute
Spanish Roman, a well-tried soldier, a man advancing in years, but he wept, and wept bitterly.
Rufinus found him thus weeping. It must have been strange to the courtier that his master did
not send his lictors to carry the offending bishop to a dungeon, and give all his court favor
to the heretics, like the last empress who had reigned at Milan. Nay, he might even, like Julian
the Apostate, have altogether renounced that Christian faith which could humble an emperor
below the poorest of his subjects.

But Rufinus contented himself with urging the Emperor not to remain at home lamenting, but
to endeavor again to obtain admission into the church, assuring him that the Bishop would give
way. Theodosius replied that he did not expect it, but yielded to the persuasions, and Rufinus
hastened on before to warn the Bishop of his coming, and represented how inexpedient it was
to offend him.

'I warn you,' replied Ambrose, 'that I shall oppose his entrance, but if he chooses to turn
his power into tyranny, I shall willingly let him slay me.'

The Emperor did not try to enter the church, but sought Ambrose in an adjoining building, where
he entreated to be absolved from his sin.

'Beware,' returned the Bishop, 'of trampling on the laws of God.' 'I respect them,' said the
Emperor, 'therefore I have not set foot in the church, but I pray thee to deliver me from these
bonds, and not to close against me the door that the Lord hath opened to all who truly repent.'

'What repentance have you shown for such a sin?' asked Ambrose.

'Appoint my penance,' said the Emperor, entirely subdued.

And Ambrose caused him at once to sign a decree that thirty days should always elapse between
a sentence of death and its execution. After this, Theodosius was allowed to come into the
church, but only to the corner he had shunned all these eight months, till the 'dull hard stone
within him' had 'melted', to the spot appointed for the penitents. There, without his crown,
his purple robe, and buskins, worked with golden eagles, all laid aside, he lay prostrate on
the stones, repeating the verse, 'My soul cleaveth unto the dust; quicken me, O Lord, according
to thy word.' This was the place that penitents always occupied, and there fasts and other
discipline were also appointed. When the due course had been gone through, probably at the
next Easter, Ambrose, in his Master's name, pronounced the forgiveness of Theodosius, and received
him back to the full privileges of a Christian. When we look at the course of many another
emperor, and see how easily, where the power was irresponsible, justice became severity, and
severity, bloodthirstiness, we see what Ambrose dared to meet, and from what he spared Theodosius
and all the civilized world under his sway. Who can tell how many innocent lives have been
saved by that thirty days' respite?

Pass over nearly 700 years, and again we find a church door barred against a monarch. This
time it is not under the bright Italian sky, but under the grey fogs of the Baltic sea. It
is not the stately marble gateway of the Milanese Basilica, but the low-arched, rough stone
portal of the newly built cathedral of Roskilde, in Zealand, where, if a zigzag surrounds the
arch, it is a great effort of genius. The Danish king Swend, the nephew of the well-known Knut,
stands before it; a stern and powerful man, fierce and passionate, and with many a Danish axe
at his command. Nay, only lately for a few rude jests, he caused some of his chief jarls to
be slain without a trial. Half the country is still pagan, and though the king himself is baptized,
there is no certainty that, if the Christian faith do not suit his taste, he may not join the
heathen party and return to the worship of Thor and Tyr, where deeds of blood would be not
blameworthy, but a passport to the rude joys of Valhall. Nevertheless there is a pastoral staff
across the doorway, barring the way of the king, and that staff is held against him by an Englishman,
William, Bishop of Roskilde, the missionary who had converted a great part of Zealand, but
who will not accept Christians who have not laid aside their sins.

He confronts the king who has never been opposed before. 'Go back,' he says, 'nor dare approach
the alter of God--thou who art not a king but a murderer.'

Some of the jarls seized their swords and axes, and were about to strike the bishop away from
the threshold, but he, without removing his staff, bent his head, and bade them strike, saying
he was ready to die in the cause of God. But the king came to a better frame of mind, he called
the jarls away, and returning humbly to his palace, took off his royal robes, and came again
barefoot and in sackcloth to the church door, where Bishop William met him, took him by the
hand, gave him the kiss of peace, and led him to the penitents' place. After three days he
was absolved, and for the rest of his life, the bishop and the king lived in the closest friendship,
so much so that William always prayed that even in death he might not be divided from his friend.
The prayer was granted. The two died almost at the same time, and were buried together in the
cathedral at Roskilde, where the one had taught and other learnt the great lesson of mercy.

THE LAST FIGHT IN THE COLISEUM

A.D. 404

As the Romans grew prouder and more fond of pleasure, no one could hope to please them who
did not give them sports and entertainments. When any person wished to be elected to any public
office, it was a matter of course that he should compliment his fellow citizens by exhibitions
of the kind they loved, and when the common people were discontented, their cry was that they
wanted panem ac Circenses, 'bread and sports', the only things they cared for. In most places
where there has been a large Roman colony, remains can be seen of the amphitheatres, where
the citizens were wont to assemble for these diversions. Sometimes these are stages of circular
galleries of seats hewn out of the hillside, where rows of spectators might sit one above the
other, all looking down on a broad, flat space in the centre, under their feet, where the representations
took place. Sometimes, when the country was flat, or it was easier to build than to excavate,
the amphitheatre was raised above ground, rising up to a considerable height.

The grandest and most renowned of all these amphitheatres is the Coliseum at Rome. It was built
by Vespasian and his son Titus, the conquerors of Jerusalem, in a valley in the midst of the
seven hills of Rome. The captive Jews were forced to labour at it; and the materials, granite
outside, and softer travertine stone within, are so solid and so admirably built, that still
at the end of eighteen centuries it has scarcely even become a ruin, but remains one of the
greatest wonders of Rome.

Five acres of ground were enclosed within the oval of its outer wall, which outside rises perpendicularly
in tiers of arches one above the other. Within, the galleries of seats projected forwards,
each tier coming out far beyond the one above it, so that between the lowest and the outer
wall there was room for a great space of chambers, passages, and vaults around the central
space, called the arena, from the arena, or sand, with which it was strewn.

When the Roman Emperors grew very vain and luxurious, they used to have this sand made ornamental
with metallic filings, vermilion, and even powdered precious stones; but it was thought better
taste to use the scrapings of a soft white stone, which, when thickly strewn, made the whole
arena look as if covered with untrodden snow. Around the border of this space flowed a stream
of fresh water. Then came a straight wall, rising to a considerable height, and surmounted
by a broad platform, on which stood a throne for the Emperor, curule chairs of ivory and gold
for the chief magistrates and senators, and seats for the vestal virgins. Next above were galleries
for the equestrian order, the great mass of those who considered themselves as of gentle station,
though not of the highest rank; farther up, and therefore farther back, were the galleries
belonging to the freemen of Rome; and these were again surmounted by another plain wall with
a platform on the top, where were places for the ladies, who were not (except the vestal virgins)
allowed to look on nearer, because of the unclothed state of some of the performers in the
arena. Between the ladies' boxes, benches were squeezed in where the lowest people could seat
themselves; and some of these likewise found room in the two uppermost tiers of porticoes,
where sailors, mechanics, and persons in the service of the Coliseum had their post. Altogether,
when full, this huge building held no less than 87,000 spectators. It had no roof; but when
there was rain, or if the sun was too hot, the sailors in the porticoes unfurled awnings that
ran along upon ropes, and formed a covering of silk and gold tissue over the whole. Purple
was the favorite color for this velamen, or veil; because, when the sun shone through it, it
cast such beautiful rosy tints on the snowy arena and the white purple-edged togas of the Roman
citizens.

Long days were spent from morning till evening upon those galleries. The multitude who poured
in early would watch the great dignitaries arrive and take their seats, greeting them either
with shouts of applause or hootings of dislike, according as they were favorites or otherwise;
and when the Emperor came in to take his place under his canopy, there was one loud acclamation,
'Joy to thee, master of all, first of all, happiest of all. Victory to thee for ever!'

When the Emperor had seated himself and given the signal, the sports began. Sometimes a rope-dancing
elephant would begin the entertainment, by mounting even to the summit of the building and
descending by a cord. Then a bear, dressed up as a Roman matron, would be carried along in
a chair between porters, as ladies were wont to go abroad, and another bear, in a lawyer's
robe, would stand on his hind legs and go through the motions of pleading a case. Or a lion
came forth with a jeweled crown on his head, a diamond necklace round his neck, his mane plaited
with gold, and his claws gilded, and played a hundred pretty gentle antics with a little hare
that danced fearlessly within his grasp. Then in would come twelve elephants, six males in
togas, six females with the veil and pallium; they took their places on couches around an ivory
table, dined with great decorum, playfully sprinkled a little rosewater over the nearest spectators,
and then received more guests of their unwieldy kind, who arrived in ball dresses, scattered
flowers, and performed a dance.

Sometimes water was let into the arena, a ship sailed in, and falling to pieces in the midst,
sent a crowd of strange animals swimming in all directions. Sometimes the ground opened, and
trees came growing up through it, bearing golden fruit. Or the beautiful old tale of Orpheus
was acted; these trees would follow the harp and song of the musician; but--to make the whole
part complete--it was no mere play, but real earnest, that the Orpheus of the piece fell a
prey to live bears.

For the Coliseum had not been built for such harmless spectacles as those first described.
The fierce Romans wanted to be excited and feel themselves strongly stirred; and, presently,
the doors of the pits and dens round the arena were thrown open, and absolutely savage beasts
were let loose upon one another--rhinoceroses and tigers, bulls and lions, leopards and wild
boars--while the people watched with savage curiosity to see the various kinds of attack and
defense; or, if the animals were cowed or sullen, their rage would be worked up--red would
be shown to the bulls, white to boars, red-hot goads would be driven into some, whips would
be lashed at others, till the work of slaughter was fairly commenced, and gazed on with greedy
eyes and ears delighted, instead of horror-struck, by the roars and howls of the noble creatures
whose courage was thus misused. Sometimes indeed, when some especially strong or ferocious
animal had slain a whole heap of victims, the cries of the people would decree that it should
be turned loose in its native forest, and, amid shouts of 'A triumph! a triumph!' the beast
would prowl round the arena, upon the carcasses of the slain victims. Almost incredible numbers
of animals were imported for these cruel sports, and the governors of distant provinces made
it a duty to collect troops of lions, elephants, ostriches, leopards--the fiercer or the newer
the creature the better--to be thus tortured to frenzy, to make sport in the amphitheatre.
However, there was daintiness joined with cruelty: the Romans did not like the smell of blood,
though they enjoyed the sight of it, and all the solid stonework was pierced with tubes, through
which was conducted the stream of spices and saffron, boiled in wine, that the perfume might
overpower the scent of slaughter below.

Wild beasts tearing each other to pieces might, one would think, satisfy any taste of horror;
but the spectators needed even nobler game to be set before their favorite monsters--men were
brought forward to confront them. Some of these were at first in full armor, and fought hard,
generally with success; and there was a revolving machine, something like a squirrel's cage,
in which the bear was always climbing after his enemy, and then rolling over by his own weight.
Or hunters came, almost unarmed, and gaining the victory by swiftness and dexterity, throwing
a piece of cloth over a lion's head, or disconcerting him by putting their fist down his throat.
But it was not only skill, but death, that the Romans loved to see; and condemned criminals
and deserters were reserved to feast the lions, and to entertain the populace with their various
kinds of death. Among these condemned was many a Christian martyr, who witnessed a good confession
before the savage-eyed multitude around the arena, and 'met the lion's gory mane' with a calm
resolution and hopeful joy that the lookers-on could not understand. To see a Christian die,
with upward gaze and hymns of joy on his tongue, was the most strange unaccountable sight the
Coliseum could offer, and it was therefore the choicest, and reserved for the last part of
the spectacles in which the brute creation had a part.

The carcasses were dragged off with hooks, and bloodstained sand was covered with a fresh clean
layer, the perfume wafted in stronger clouds, and a procession came forward--tall, well-made
men, in the prime of their strength. Some carried a sword and a lasso, others a trident and
a net; some were in light armor, others in the full heavy equipment of a soldier; some on horseback,
some in chariots, some on foot. They marched in, and made their obeisance to the Emperor; and
with one voice, their greeting sounded through the building, Ave, Caesar, morituri te salutant!
'Hail, Caesar, those about to die salute thee!'

They were the gladiators--the swordsmen trained to fight to the death to amuse the populace.
They were usually slaves placed in schools of arms under the care of a master; but sometimes
persons would voluntarily hire themselves out to fight by way of a profession: and both these,
and such slave gladiators as did not die in the arena, would sometimes retire, and spend an
old age of quiet; but there was little hope of this, for the Romans were not apt to have mercy
on the fallen.

Fights of all sorts took place--the light-armed soldier and the netsman --the lasso and the
javelin--the two heavy-armed warriors--all combinations of single combat, and sometimes a general
melee. When a gladiator wounded his adversary, he shouted to the spectators, Hoc habet! 'He
has it!' and looked up to know whether he should kill or spare. If the people held up their
thumbs, the conquered was left to recover, if he could; if they turned them down, he was to
die: and if he showed any reluctance to present his throat for the deathblow, there was a scornful
shout, Recipe ferrum! Privileged persons would even descend into the arena, examine the death
agonies, and taste the blood of some specially brave victim ere the corpse was drawn forth
at the death gate, that the frightful game might continue undisturbed and unencumbered. Gladiator
shows were the great passion of Rome, and popular favor could hardly be gained except by ministering
to it. Even when the barbarians were beginning to close in on the Empire, hosts of brave men
were still kept for this slavish mimic warfare--sport to the beholders, but sad earnest to
the actors.

Christianity worked its way upwards, and at least was professed by the Emperor on his throne.
Persecution came to an end, and no more martyrs fed the beasts in the Coliseum. The Christian
emperors endeavored to prevent any more shows where cruelty and death formed the chief interest
and no truly religious person could endure the spectacle; but custom and love of excitement
prevailed even against the Emperor. Mere tricks of beasts, horse and chariot races, or bloodless
contests, were tame and dull, according to the diseased taste of Rome; it was thought weak
and sentimental to object to looking on at a death scene; the Emperors were generally absent
at Constantinople, and no one could get elected to any office unless he treated the citizens
to such a show as they best liked, with a little bloodshed and death to stir their feelings;
and thus it went on for full a hundred years after Rome had, in name, become a Christian city,
and the same custom prevailed wherever there was an amphitheatre and pleasure-loving people.

Meantime the enemies of Rome were coming nearer and nearer, and Alaric, the great chief of
the Goths, led his forces into Italy, and threatened the city itself. Honorius, the Emperor,
was a cowardly, almost idiotical, boy; but his brave general, Stilicho, assembled his forces,
met the Goths at Pollentia (about twenty-five miles from where Turin now stands), and gave
them a complete defeat on the Easter Day of the year 403. He pursued them into the mountains,
and for that time saved Rome. In the joy of the victory the Roman senate invited the conqueror
and his ward Honorius to enter the city in triumph, at the opening of the new year, with the
white steeds, purple robes, and vermilion cheeks with which, of old, victorious generals were
welcomed at Rome. The churches were visited instead of the Temple of Jupiter, and there was
no murder of the captives; but Roman bloodthirstiness was not yet allayed, and, after all the
procession had been completed, the Coliseum shows commenced, innocently at first, with races
on foot, on horseback, and in chariots; then followed a grand hunting of beasts turned loose
in the arena; and next a sword dance. But after the sword dance came the arraying of swordsmen,
with no blunted weapons, but with sharp spears and swords--a gladiator combat in full earnest.
The people, enchanted, applauded with shouts of ecstasy this gratification of their savage
tastes. Suddenly, however, there was an interruption. A rude, roughly robed man, bareheaded
and barefooted, had sprung into the arena, and, signing back the gladiators, began to call
aloud upon the people to cease from the shedding of innocent blood, and not to requite God's
mercy in turning away the sword of the enemy by encouraging murder. Shouts, howls, cries, broke
in upon his words; this was no place for preachings--the old customs of Rome should be observed
'Back, old man!' 'On, gladiators!' The gladiators thrust aside the meddler, and rushed to the
attack. He still stood between, holding them apart, striving in vain to be heard. 'Sedition!
Sedition!' 'Down with him!' was the cry; and the man in authority, Alypius, the prefect, himself
added his voice. The gladiators, enraged at interference with their vocation, cut him down.
Stones, or whatever came to hand, rained down upon him from the furious people, and he perished
in the midst of the arena! He lay dead, and then came the feeling of what had been done.

His dress showed that he was one of the hermits who vowed themselves to a holy life of prayer
and self-denial, and who were greatly reverenced, even by the most thoughtless. The few who
had previously seen him, told that he had come from the wilds of Asia on pilgrimage, to visit
the shrines and keep his Christmas at Rome--they knew he was a holy man--no more, and it is
not even certain whether his name was Alymachus or Telemachus. His spirit had been stirred
by the sight of thousands flocking to see men slaughter one another, and in his simple-hearted
zeal he had resolved to stop the cruelty or die. He had died, but not in vain. His work was
done. The shock of such a death before their eyes turned the hearts of the people; they saw
the wickedness and cruelty to which they had blindly surrendered themselves; and from the day
when the hermit died in the Coliseum there was never another fight of the Gladiators. Not merely
at Rome, but in every province of the Empire, the custom was utterly abolished; and one habitual
crime at least was wiped from the earth by the self-devotion of one humble, obscure, almost
nameless man.

THE SHEPHERD GIRL OF NANTERRE

A.D. 438

Four hundred years of the Roman dominion had entirely tamed the once wild and independent Gauls.
Everywhere, except in the moorlands of Brittany, they had become as much like Romans themselves
as they could accomplish; they had Latin names, spoke the Latin tongue, all their personages
of higher rank were enrolled as Roman citizens, their chief cities were colonies where the
laws were administered by magistrates in the Roman fashion, and the houses, dress, and amusements
were the same as those of Italy. The greater part of the towns had been converted to Christianity,
though some Paganism still lurked in the more remote villages and mountainous districts.

It was upon these civilized Gauls that the terrible attacks came from the wild nations who
poured out of the centre and east of Europe. The Franks came over the Rhine and its dependent
rivers, and made furious attacks upon the peaceful plains, where the Gauls had long lived in
security, and reports were everywhere heard of villages harried by wild horsemen, with short
double-headed battleaxes, and a horrible short pike, covered with iron and with several large
hooks, like a gigantic artificial minnow, and like it fastened to a long rope, so that the
prey which it had grappled might be pulled up to the owner. Walled cities usually stopped them,
but every farm or villa outside was stripped of its valuables, set on fire, the cattle driven
off, and the more healthy inhabitants seized for slaves.

It was during this state of things that a girl was born to a wealthy peasant at the village
now called Nanterre, about two miles from Lutetia, which was already a prosperous city, though
not as yet so entirely the capital as it was destined to become under the name of Paris. She
was christened by an old Gallic name, probably Gwenfrewi, or White Stream, in Latin Genovefa,
but she is best known by the late French form of Genevieve. When she was about seven years
old, two celebrated bishops passed through the village, Germanus, of Auxerre, and Lupus, of
Troyes, who had been invited to Britain to dispute the false doctrine of Pelagius. All the
inhabitants flocked into the church to see them, pray with them, and receive their blessing;
and here the sweet childish devotion of Genevieve so struck Germanus, that he called her to
him, talked to her, made her sit beside him at the feast, gave her his special blessing, and
presented her with a copper medal with a cross engraven upon it. From that time the little
maiden always deemed herself especially consecrated to the service of Heaven, but she still
remained at home, daily keeping her father's sheep, and spinning their wool as she sat under
the trees watching them, but always with a heart full of prayer.

After this St. Germanus proceeded to Britain, and there encouraged his converts to meet the
heathen Picts at Maes Garmon, in Flintshire, where the exulting shout of the white-robed catechumens
turned to flight the wild superstitious savages of the north,--and the Hallelujah victory was
gained without a drop of bloodshed. He never lost sight of Genevieve, the little maid whom
he had so early distinguished for her piety.

After she lost her parents she went to live with her godmother, and continued the same simple
habits, leading a life of sincere devotion and strict self-denial, constant prayer, and much
charity to her poorer neighbors.

In the year 451 the whole of Gaul was in the most dreadful state of terror at the advance of
Attila, the savage chief of the Huns, who came from the banks of the Danube with a host of
savages of hideous features, scarred and disfigured to render them more frightful. The old
enemies, the Goths and the Franks, seemed like friends compared with these formidable beings
whose cruelties were said to be intolerable, and of whom every exaggerated story was told that
could add to the horrors of the miserable people who lay in their path. Tidings came that this
'Scourge of God', as Attila called himself, had passed the Rhine, destroyed Tongres and Metz,
and was in full march for Paris. The whole country was in the utmost terror. Everyone seized
their most valuable possessions, and would have fled; but Genevieve placed herself on the only
bridge across the Seine, and argued with them, assuring them in a strain that was afterwards
thought of as prophetic, that, if they would pray, repent, and defend instead of abandoning
their homes, God would protect them. They were at first almost ready to stone her for thus
withstanding their panic, but just then a priest arrived from Auxerre, with a present for Genevieve
from St. Germanus, and they were thus reminded of the high estimation in which he held her;
they became ashamed of their violence, and she held them back to pray and to arm themselves.
In a few days they heard that Attila had paused to besiege Orleans, and that Aetius, the Roman
general, hurrying from Italy, had united his troops with those of the Goths and Franks, and
given Attila so terrible a defeat at Chalons that the Huns were fairly driven out of Gaul.
And here it must be mentioned that when the next year, 452, Attila with his murderous host
came down into Italy, and after horrible devastation of all the northern provinces, came to
the gates of Rome, no one dared to meet him but one venerable Bishop, Leo, the Pope, who, when
his flock were in transports of despair, went forth only accompanied by one magistrate to meet
the invader, and endeavor to turn his wrath side. The savage Huns were struck with awe by the
fearless majesty of the unarmed old man. They conducted him safely to Attila, who listened
to him with respect, and promised not to lead his people into Rome, provided a tribute should
be paid to him. He then retreated, and, to the joy of all Europe, died on his way back to his
native dominions.

But with the Huns the danger and suffering of Europe did not end. The happy state described
in the Prophets as 'dwelling safely, with none to make them afraid', was utterly unknown in
Europe throughout the long break-up of the Roman Empire; and in a few more years the Franks
were overrunning the banks of the Seine, and actually venturing to lay siege to the Roman walls
of Paris itself. The fortifications were strong enough, but hunger began to do the work of
the besiegers, and the garrison, unwarlike and untrained, began to despair. But Genevieve's
courage and trust never failed; and finding no warriors willing to run the risk of going beyond
the walls to obtain food for the women and children who were perishing around them, this brave
shepherdess embarked alone in a little boat, and guiding it down the stream, landed beyond
the Frankish camp, and repairing to the different Gallic cities, she implored them to send
succor to the famished brethren. She obtained complete success. Probably the Franks had no
means of obstructing the passage of the river, so that a convoy of boats could easily penetrate
into the town, and at any rate they looked upon Genevieve as something sacred and inspired
whom they durst not touch; probably as one of the battle maids in whom their own myths taught
them to believe. One account indeed says that, instead of going alone to obtain help, Genevieve
placed herself at the head of a forage party, and that the mere sight of her inspired bearing
caused them to be allowed to enter and return in safety; but the boat version seems the more
probable, since a single boat on a broad river would more easily elude the enemy than a troop
of Gauls pass through their army.

But a city where all the valor resided in one woman could not long hold out, and in another
inroad, when Genevieve was absent, Paris was actually seized by the Franks. Their leader, Hilperik,
was absolutely afraid of what the mysteriously brave maiden might do to him, and commanded
the gates of the city to be carefully guarded lest she should enter; but Geneviere learnt that
some of the chief citizens were imprisoned, and that Hilperik intended their death, and nothing
could withhold her from making an effort in their behalf. The Franks had made up their minds
to settle, and not to destroy. They were not burning and slaying indiscriminately, but while
despising the Romans, as they called the Gauls, for their cowardice, they were in awe of the
superior civilization and the knowledge of arts. The country people had free access to the
city, and Genevieve in her homely gown and veil passed by Hilperik's guards without being suspected
of being more than an ordinary Gaulish village maid; and thus she fearlessly made her way,
even to the old Roman halls, where the long-haired Hilperik was holding his wild carousal.
Would that we knew more of that interview--one of the most striking that ever took place! We
can only picture to ourselves the Roman tessellated pavement bestrewn with wine, bones, and
fragments of the barbarous revelry. There were untamed Franks, their sun-burnt hair tied up
in a knot at the top of their heads, and falling down like a horse's tail, their faces close
shaven, except two moustaches, and dressed in tight leather garments, with swords at their
wide belts. Some slept, some feasted, some greased their long locks, some shouted out their
favorite war songs around the table which was covered with the spoils of churches, and at their
heads sat the wild, long-haired chieftain, who was a few years later driven away by his own
followers for his excesses, the whole scene was all that was abhorrent to a pure, devout, and
faithful nature, most full of terror to a woman. Yet, there, in her strength, stood the peasant
maiden, her heart full of trust and pity, her looks full of the power that is given by fearlessness
of them that can kill the body. What she said we do not know--we only know that the barbarous
Hilperik was overawed; he trembled before the expostulations of the brave woman, and granted
all she asked--the safety of his prisoners, and mercy to the terrified inhabitants. No wonder
that the people of Paris have ever since looked back to Genevieve as their protectress, and
that in after ages she has grown to be the patron saint of the city.

She lived to see the son of Hilperik, Chlodweh, or, as he was more commonly called, Clovis,
marry a Christian wife, Clotilda, and after a time became a Christian. She saw the foundation
of the Cathedral of Notre-Dame, and of the two famous churches of St. Denys and of St. Martin
of Tours, and gave her full share to the first efforts for bringing the rude and bloodthirsty
conquerors to some knowledge of Christian faith, mercy, and purity. After a life of constant
prayer and charity she died, three months after King Clovis, in the year 512, the eighty-ninth
of her age. [Footnote: Perhaps the exploits of the Maid of Orleans were the most like those
of Genevieve, but they are not here added to our collection of 'Golden Deeds,' because the
Maid's belief that she was directly inspired removes them from the ordinary class. Alas! the
English did not treat her as Hilperik treated Genevieve.

LEO THE SLAVE

A.D. 533

The Franks had fully gained possession of all the north of Gaul, except Brittany. Chlodweh
had made them Christians in name, but they still remained horribly savage--and the life of
the Gauls under them was wretched. The Burgundians and Visigoths who had peopled the southern
and eastern provinces were far from being equally violent. They had entered on their settlements
on friendly terms, and even showed considerable respect for the Roman-Gallic senators, magistrates,
and higher clergy, who all remained unmolested in their dignities and riches. Thus it was that
Gregory, Bishop of Langres, was a man of high rank and consideration in the Burgundian kingdom,
whence the Christian Queen Clotilda had come; and even after the Burgundians had been subdued
by the four sons of Chlodweh, he continued a rich and prosperous man.

After one of the many quarrels and reconciliations between these fierce brethren, there was
an exchange of hostages for the observance of the terms of the treaty. These were not taken
from among the Franks, who were too proud to submit to captivity, but from among the Gaulish
nobles, a much more convenient arrangement to the Frankish kings, who cared for the life of
a 'Roman' infinitely less than even for the life of a Frank. Thus many young men of senatorial
families were exchanged between the domains of Theodrik to the south, and of Hildebert to the
northward, and quartered among Frankish chiefs, with whom at first they had nothing more to
endure than the discomfort of living as guests with such rude and coarse barbarians. But ere
long fresh quarrels broke out between Theodrik and Hildebert, and the unfortunate hostages
were at once turned into slaves. Some of them ran away if they were near the frontier, but
Bishop Gregory was in the utmost anxiety about his young nephew Attalus, who had been last
heard of as being placed under the charge of a Frank who lived between Treves and Metz. The
Bishop sent emissaries to make secret enquiries, and they brought word that the unfortunate
youth had indeed been reduced to slavery, and was made to keep his master's herds of horses.
Upon this the uncle again sent off his messengers with presents for the ransom of Attalus,
but the Frank rejected them, saying, 'One of such high race can only be redeemed for ten pounds'
weight of gold.'

This was beyond the Bishop's means, and while he was considering how to raise the sum, the
slaves were all lamenting for their young lord, to whom they were much attached, till one of
them, named Leo, the cook to the household, came to the Bishop, saying to him, 'If thou wilt
give me leave to go, I will deliver him from captivity.' The Bishop replied that he gave free
permission, and the slave set off for Treves, and there watched anxiously for an opportunity
of gaining access to Attalus; but though the poor young man--no longer daintily dressed, bathed,
and perfumed, but ragged and squalid--might be seen following his herds of horses, he was too
well watched for any communication to be held with him. Then Leo went to a person, probably
of Gallic birth, and said, 'Come with me to this barbarian's house, and there sell me for a
slave. Thou shalt have the money, I only ask thee to help me thus far.'

Both repaired to the Frank's abode, the chief among a confused collection of clay and timber
huts intended for shelter during eating and sleeping. The Frank looked at the slave, and asked
him what he could do.

'I can dress whatever is eaten at lordly tables,' replied Leo. 'I am afraid of no rival; I
only tell thee the truth when I say that if thou wouldst give a feast to the king, I would
send it up in the neatest manner.'

'Ha!' said the barbarian, 'the Sun's day is coming--I shall invite my kinsmen and friends.
Cook me such a dinner as may amaze them, and make then say, 'We saw nothing better in the king's
house.' 'Let me have plenty of poultry, and I will do according to my master's bidding,' returned
Leo.

Accordingly, he was purchased for twelve gold pieces, and on the Sunday (as Bishop Gregory
of Tours, who tells the story, explains that the barbarians called the Lord's day) he produced
a banquet after the most approved Roman fashion, much to the surprise and delight of the Franks,
who had never tasted such delicacies before, and complimented their host upon them all the
evening. Leo gradually became a great favorite, and was placed in authority over the other
slaves, to whom he gave out their daily portions of broth and meat; but from the first he had
not shown any recognition of Attalus, and had signed to him that they must be strangers to
one another. A whole year had passed away in this manner, when one day Leo wandered, as if
for pastime, into the plain where Attalus was watching the horses, and sitting down on the
ground at some paces off, and with his back towards his young master, so that they might not
be seen together, he said, 'This is the time for thoughts of home! When thou hast led the horses
to the stable to-night, sleep not. Be ready at the first call!'

That day the Frank lord was entertaining a large number of guests, among them his daughter's
husband, a jovial young man, given to jesting. On going to rest he fancied he should be thirsty
at night and called Leo to set a pitcher of hydromel by his bedside. As the slave was setting
it down, the Frank looked slyly from under his eyelids, and said in joke, 'Tell me, my father-in-law's
trusty man, wilt not thou some night take one of those horses, and run away to thine own home?'

'Please God, it is what I mean to do this very night,' answered the Gaul, so undauntedly that
the Frank took it as a jest, and answered, 'I shall look out that thou dost not carry off anything
of mine,' and then Leo left him, both laughing.

All were soon asleep, and the cook crept out to the stable, where Attalus usually slept among
the horses. He was broad awake now, and ready to saddle the two swiftest; but he had no weapon
except a small lance, so Leo boldly went back to his master's sleeping hut, and took down his
sword and shield, but not without awaking him enough to ask who was moving. 'It is I--Leo,'
was the answer, 'I have been to call Attalus to take out the horses early. He sleeps as hard
as a drunkard.' The Frank went to sleep again, quite satisfied, and Leo, carrying out the weapons,
soon made Attalus feel like a free man and a noble once more. They passed unseen out of the
enclosure, mounted their horses, and rode along the great Roman road from Treves as far as
the Meuse, but they found the bridge guarded, and were obliged to wait till night, when they
cast their horses loose and swam the river, supporting themselves on boards that they found
on the bank. They had as yet had no food since the supper at their master's, and were thankful
to find a plum tree in the wood, with fruit, to refresh them in some degree, before they lay
down for the night. The next morning they went on in the direction of Rheims, carefully listening
whether there were any sounds behind, until, on the broad hard-paved causeway, they actually
heard the trampling of horses. Happily a bush was near, behind which they crept, with their
naked swords before them, and here the riders actually halted for a few moments to arrange
their harness. Men and horses were both those they feared, and they trembled at hearing one
say, 'Woe is me that those rogues have made off, and have not been caught! On my salvation,
if I catch them, I will have one hung and the other chopped into bits!' It was no small comfort
to hear the trot of the horses resumed, and soon dying away in the distance. That same night
the two faint, hungry, weary travelers, footsore and exhausted, came stumbling into Rheims,
looking about for some person still awake to tell them the way to the house of the Priest Paul,
a friend of Attalus' uncle. They found it just as the church bell was ringing for matins, a
sound that must have seemed very like home to these members of an episcopal household. They
knocked, and in the morning twilight met the Priest going to his earliest Sunday morning service.

Leo told his young master's name, and how they had escaped, and the Priest's first exclamation
was a strange one: 'My dream is true. This very night I saw two doves, one white and one black,
who came and perched on my hand.'

The good man was overjoyed, but he scrupled to give them any food, as it was contrary to the
Church's rules for the fast to be broken before mass; but the travelers were half dead with
hunger, and could only say, 'The good Lord pardon us, for, saving the respect due to His day,
we must eat something, since this is the forth day since we have touched bread or meat.' The
Priest upon this gave them some bread and wine, and after hiding them carefully, went to church,
hoping to avert suspicion; but their master was already at Rheims, making strict search for
them, and learning that Paul the Priest was a friend of the Bishop of Langres, he went to church,
and there questioned him closely. But the Priest succeeded in guarding his secret, and though
he incurred much danger, as the Salic law was very severe against concealers of runaway slaves,
he kept Attalus and Leo for two days till the search was blown over, and their strength was
restored, so that they could proceed to Langres. There they were welcomed like men risen from
the dead; the Bishop wept on the neck of Attalus, and was ready to receive Leo as a slave no
more, but a friend and deliverer.

A few days after Leo was solemnly led to the church. Every door was set open as a sign that
he might henceforth go whithersoever he would. Bishop Gregorus took him by the hand, and, standing
before the Archdeacon, declared that for the sake of the good services rendered by his slave,
Leo, he set him free, and created him a Roman citizen.

Then the Archdeacon read a writing of manumission. 'Whatever is done according to the Roman
law is irrevocable. According to the constitution of the Emperor Constantine, of happy memory,
and the edict that declares that whosoever is manumitted in church, in the presence of the
bishops, priests, and deacons, shall become a Roman citizen under the protection of the Church:
from this day Leo becomes a member of the city, free to go and come where he will as if he
had been born of free parents. From this day forward, he is exempt from all subjection of servitude,
of all duty of a freed-man, all bond of client-ship. He is and shall be free, with full and
entire freedom, and shall never cease to belong to the body of Roman citizens.'

At the same time Leo was endowed with lands, which raised him to the rank of what the Franks
called a Roman proprietor--the highest reward in the Bishop's power for the faithful devotion
that had incurred such dangers in order to rescue the young Attalus from his miserable bondage.

Somewhat of the same kind of faithfulness was shown early in the nineteenth century by Ivan
Simonoff, a soldier servant belonging to Major Kascambo, an officer in the Russian army, who
was made prisoner by one of the wild tribes of the Caucasus. But though the soldier's attachment
to his master was quite as brave and disinterested as that of the Gallic slave, yet he was
far from being equally blameless in the means he employed, and if his were a golden deed at
all, it was mixed with much of iron.

Major Kascambo, with a guard of fifty Cossacks, was going to take the command of the Russian
outpost of Lars, one of the forts by which the Russian Czars have slowly been carrying on the
aggressive warfare that has nearly absorbed into their vast dominions all the mountains between
the Caspian and Black seas. On his way he was set upon by seven hundred horsemen of the savage
and independent tribe of Tchetchenges. There was a sharp fight, more than half his men were
killed, and he with the rest made a rampart of the carcasses of their horses, over which they
were about to fire their last shots, when the Tchetchenges made a Russian deserter call out
to the Cossacks that they would let them all escape provided they would give up their officer.
Kascambo on this came forward and delivered himself into their hands; while the remainder of
the troops galloped off. His servant, Ivan, with a mule carrying his baggage, had been hidden
in a ravine, and now, instead of retreating with the Cossacks, came to join his master. All
the baggage was, however, instantly seized and divided among the Tchetchenges; nothing was
left but a guitar, which they threw scornfully to the Major. He would have let it lie, but
Ivan picked it up, and insisted on keeping it. 'Why be dispirited?' he said; 'the God of the
Russians is great, it is the interest of the robbers to save you, they will do you no harm.'

Scouts brought word that the Russian outposts were alarmed, and that troops were assembling
to rescue the officer. Upon this the seven hundred broke up into small parties, leaving only
ten men on foot to conduct the prisoners, whom they forced to take off their iron-shod boots
and walk barefoot over stones and thorns, till the Major was so exhausted that they were obliged
to drag him by cords fastened to his belt.

After a terrible journey, the prisoners were placed in a remote village, where the Major had
heavy chains fastened to his hands and feet, and another to his neck, with a huge block of
oak as a clog at the other end; they half-starved him, and made him sleep on the bare ground
of the hut in which he lodged. The hut belonged to a huge, fierce old man of sixty named Ibrahim,
whose son had been killed in a skirmish with the Russians. This man, together with his son's
widow, were continually trying to revenge themselves on their captive. The only person who
showed him any kindness was his little grandson, a child of seven years old, called Mamet,
who often caressed him, and brought him food by stealth. Ivan was also in the same hut, but
less heavily ironed than his master, and able to attempt a few alleviations for his wretched
condition. An interpreter brought the Major a sheet of paper and a reed pen, and commanded
him to write to his friends that he might be ransomed for 10,000 roubles, but that, if the
whole sum were not paid, he would be put to death. He obeyed, but he knew that his friends
could not possibly raise such a sum, and his only hope was in the government, which had once
ransomed a colonel who had fallen into the hands of the same tribe.

These Tchetchenges professed to be Mahometans, but their religion sat very loose upon them,
and they were utter barbarians. One piece of respect they paid the Major's superior education
was curious--they made him judge in all the disputes that arose. The houses in the village
were hollowed out underground, and the walls only raised three or four feet, and then covered
by a flat roof, formed of beaten clay, where the inhabitants spent much of their time. Kascambo
was every now and then brought, in all his chains, to the roof of the hut, which served as
a tribunal whence he was expected to dispense justice. For instance, a man had commissioned
his neighbour to pay five roubles to a person in another valley, but the messenger's horse
having died by the way, a claim was set up to the roubles to make up for it. Both parties collected
all their friends, and a bloody quarrel was about to take place, when they agreed to refer
the question to the prisoner, who was accordingly set upon his judgment seat.

'Pray,' said he, 'if, instead of giving you five roubles, your comrade had desired you to carry
his greetings to his creditor, would not your horse have died all the same?'

'Most likely.'

'Then what should you have done with the greetings? Should you have kept them in compensation?
My sentence is that you should give back the roubles, and that your comrade gives you a greeting.'

The whole assembly approved the decision, and the man only grumbled out, as he gave back the
money, 'I knew I should lose it, if that dog of a Christian meddled with it.'

All this respect, however, did not avail to procure any better usage for the unfortunate judge,
whose health was suffering severely under his privations. Ivan, however, had recommended himself
in the same way as Leo, by his perfections as a cook, and moreover he was a capital buffoon.
His fetters were sometimes taken off that he might divert the villagers by his dances and strange
antics while his master played the guitar. Sometimes they sang Russian songs together to the
instrument, and on these occasions the Major's hands were released that he might play on it;
but one day he was unfortunately heard playing in his chains for his own amusement, and from
that time he was never released from his fetters.

In the course of a year, three urgent letters had been sent; but no notice was taken of them,
and Ivan began to despair of aid from home, and set himself to work. His first step was to
profess himself a Mahometan. He durst not tell his master till the deed was done, and then
Kascambo was infinitely shocked; but the act did not procure Ivan so much freedom as he had
hoped. He was, indeed, no longer in chains, but he was evidently distrusted, and was so closely
watched, that the only way in which he could communicate with his master was when they were
set to sing together, when they chanted out question and answer in Russ, unsuspected, to the
tune of their national airs. He was taken on an expedition against the Russians, and very nearly
killed by the suspicious Tchetchenges on one side, and by the Cossacks on the other, as a deserter.
He saved a young man of the tribe from drowning; but though he thus earned the friendship of
the family, the rest of the villagers hated and dreaded him all the more, since he had not
been able to help proving himself a man of courage, instead of the feeble buffoon he had tried
to appear.

Three months after this expedition, another took place; but Ivan was not allowed even to know
of it. He saw preparations making, but nothing was said to him; only one morning he found the
village entirely deserted by all the young men, and as he wandered round it, the aged ones
would not speak to him. A child told him that his father had meant to kill him, and on the
roof of her house stood the sister of the man he had saved, making signals of great terror,
and pointing towards Russia. Home he went and found that, besides old Ibrahim, his master was
watched by a warrior, who had been prevented by an intermitting fever from joining the expedition.
He was convinced that if the tribe returned unsuccessful, the murder of both himself and his
master was certain; but he resolved not to fly alone, and as he busied himself in preparing
the meal, he sung the burden of a Russian ballad, intermingled with words of encouragement
for his master:

The time is come;
  Hai Luli!
The time is come,
  Hai Luli!
Our woe is at an end,
  Hai Luli!
Or we die at once!
  Hai Luli!
To-morrow, to-morrow,
  Hai Luli!
We are off for a town,
  Hai Luli!
For a fine, fine town,
  Hai Luli!
But I name no names,
  Hai Luli!
Courage, courage, master dear,
  Hai Luli!
Never, never, despair,
  Hai Luli!
For the God of the Russians is great,
  Hai Luli!

Poor Kascambo, broken down, sick, and despairing, only muttered, 'Do as you please, only hold
your peace!'

Ivan's cookery incited the additional guard to eat so much supper, that he brought on a severe
attack of his fever, and was obliged to go home; but old Ibrahim, instead of going to bed,
sat down on a log of wood opposite the prisoner, and seemed resolved to watch him all night.
The woman and child went to bed in the inner room, and Ivan signed to his master to take the
guitar, and began to dance. The old man's axe was in an open cupboard at the other end of the
room, and after many gambols and contortions, during which the Major could hardly control his
fingers to touch the strings, Ivan succeeded in laying his hands upon it, just when the old
man was bending over the fire to mend it. Then, as Ibrahim desired that the music should cease,
he cut him down with a single blow, on his own hearth. And the daughter-in-law coming out to
see what had happened, he slew her with the same weapon. And then, alas! in spite of the commands,
entreaties, and cries of his master, he dashed into the inner room, and killed the sleeping
child, lest it should give the alarm. Kascambo, utterly helpless to save, fell almost fainting
upon the bloody floor, and did not cease to reproach Ivan, who was searching the old man's
pockets for the key of the fetters, but it was not there, nor anywhere else in the hut, and
the irons were so heavy that escape was impossible in them. Ivan at last knocked off the clog
and the chains on the wrist with the axe, but he could not break the chains round the legs,
and could only fasten them as close as he could to hinder them clanking. Then securing all
the provisions he could carry, and putting his master into his military cloak, obtaining also
a pistol and dagger, they crept out, but not on the direct road. It was February, and the ground
was covered with snow. All night they walked easily, but at noon the sun so softened it that
they sank in at every step, and the Major's chains rendered each motion terrible labour. It
was only on the second night that Ivan, with his axe, succeeded in breaking through the fastenings,
and by that time the Major's legs were so swollen and stiffened that he could not move without
extreme pain. However, he was dragged on through the wild mountain paths, and then over the
plains for several days more, till they were on the confines of another tribe of Tchetchenges,
who were overawed by Russia, and in a sort of unwilling alliance. Here, however, a sharp storm,
and a fall into the water, completely finished Kascambo's strength, and he sank down on the
snow, telling Ivan to go home and explain his fate, and give his last message to his mother.

'If you perish here,' said Ivan, 'trust me, neither your mother nor mine will ever see me again.'

He covered his master with his cloak, gave him the pistol, and walked on to a hut, where he
found a Tchetchenge man, and told him that here was a means of obtaining two hundred roubles.
He had only to shelter the major as a guest for three days, whilst Ivan himself went on to
Mosdok, to procure the money, and bring back help for his master. The man was full of suspicion,
but Ivan prevailed, and Kascambo was carried into the village nearly dying, and was very ill
all the time of his servant's absence. Ivan set off for the nearest Russian station, where
he found some of the Cossacks who had been present when the major was taken. All eagerly subscribed
to raise the two hundred roubles, but the Colonel would not let Ivan go back alone, as he had
engaged to do, and sent a guard of Cossacks. This had nearly been fatal to the Major, for as
soon as his host saw the lances, he suspected treachery, and dragging his poor sick guest to
the roof of the house, he tied him up to a stake, and stood over him with a pistol, shouting
to Ivan, 'If you come nearer, I shall blow his brains out, and I have fifty cartridges more
for my enemies, and the traitor who leads them.'

'No traitor!' cried Ivan. 'Here are the roubles. I have kept my word!'

'Let the Cossacks go back, or I shall fire.'

Kascambo himself begged the officer to retire, and Ivan went back with the detachment, and
returned alone. Even then the suspicious host made him count out the roubles at a hundred paces
from the house, and at once ordered him out of sight; but then went up to the roof, and asked
the Major's pardon for all this rough usage.

'I shall only recollect that you were my host, and kept your word,' said Kascambo.

In a few hours more, Kascambo was in safety among his brother officers. Ivan was made a non-commissioned
officer, and some months after was seen by the traveler who told the story, whistling the air
of Hai Luli at his former master's wedding feast. He was even then scarcely twenty years old,
and peculiarly quiet and soft in manners.

THE BATTLE OF THE BLACKWATER

991

In the evil days of King Ethelred the Unready, when the teaching of good King Alfred was fast
fading away from the minds of his descendants, and self-indulgence was ruining the bold and
hardy habits of the English, the fleet was allowed to fall into decay, and Danish ships again
ventured to appear on the English coasts.

The first Northmen who had ravaged England came eager for blood and plunder, and hating the
sight of a Christian church as an insult to their gods, Thor and Odin; but the lapse of a hundred
years had in some degree changed the temper of the North; and though almost every young man
thought it due to his fame to have sailed forth as a sea rover, yet the attacks of these marauders
might be bought off, and provided they had treasure to show for their voyage, they were willing
to spare the lives and lands of the people of the coasts they visited.

King Ethelred and his cowardly, selfish Court were well satisfied with this expedient, and
the tax called Danegeld was laid upon the people, in order to raise a fund for buying off the
enemy. But there were still in England men of bolder and truer hearts, who held that bribery
was false policy, merely inviting the enemy to come again and again, and that the only wise
course would be in driving them back by English valor, and keeping the fleet in a condition
to repel the 'Long Serpent' ships before the foe could set foot upon the coast.

Among those who held this opinion was Brythnoth, Earl of Essex. He was of partly Danish descent
himself, but had become a thorough Englishman, and had long and faithfully served the King
and his father. He was a friend to the clergy, a founder of churches and convents, and his
manor house of Hadleigh was a home of hospitality and charity. It would probably be a sort
of huge farmyard, full of great barn-like buildings and sheds, all one story high; some of
them serving for storehouses, and others for living-rooms and places of entertainment for his
numerous servants and retainers, and for the guests of all degrees who gathered round him as
the chief dispenser of justice in his East-Saxon earldom. When he heard the advice given and
accepted that the Danes should be bribed, instead of being fought with, he made up his mind
that he, at least, would try to raise up a nobler spirit, and, at the sacrifice of his own
life, would show the effect of making a manful stand against them.

He made his will, and placed it in the hands of the Archbishop of Canterbury; and then, retiring
to Hadleigh, he provided horses and arms, and caused all the young men in his earldom to be
trained in warlike exercises, according to the good old English law, that every man should
be provided with weapons and know the use of them.

The Danes sailed forth, in the year 991, with ninety-three vessels, the terrible 'Long Serpents',
carved with snakes' heads at the prow, and the stern finished as the gilded tail of the reptile;
and many a lesser ship, meant for carrying plunder. The Sea King, Olaf (or Anlaff), was the
leader; and as tidings came that their sails had been seen upon the North Sea, more earnest
than ever rang out the petition in the Litany, 'From the fury of the Northmen, good Lord, deliver
us'.

Sandwich and Ipswich made no defense, and were plundered; and the fleet then sailed into the
mouth of the River Blackwater, as far as Maldon, where the ravagers landed, and began to collect
spoil. When, however, they came back to their ships, they found that the tide would not yet
serve them to re-embark; and upon the farther bank of the river bristled the spears of a body
of warriors, drawn up in battle array, but in numbers far inferior to their own.

Anlaff sent a messenger, over the wooden bridge that crossed the river, to the Earl, who, he
understood, commanded this small army. The brave old man, his grey hair hanging down beneath
his helmet, stood, sword in hand, at the head of his warriors.

'Lord Earl,' said the messenger, 'I come to bid thee to yield to us thy treasure, for thy safety.
Buy off the fight, and we will ratify a peace with gold.'

'Hear, O thou sailor!' was Brythnoth's answer, 'the reply of this people. Instead of Danegeld,
thou shalt have from them the edge of the sword, and the point of the spear. Here stands an
English Earl, who will defend his earldom and the lands of his King. Point and edge shall judge
between us.'

Back went the Dane with his message to Anlaff, and the fight began around the bridge, where
the Danes long strove to force their way across, but were always driven back by the gallant
East-Saxons. The tide had risen, and for some time the two armies only shot at one another
with bows and arrows; but when it ebbed, leaving the salt-marches dry, the stout old Earl's
love of fair play overpowered his prudence, and he sent to offer the enemy a free passage,
and an open field in which to measure their strength.

The numbers were too unequal; but the battle was long and bloody before the English could be
overpowered. Brythnoth slew one of the chief Danish leaders with his own hand, but not without
receiving a wound. He was still able to fight on, though with ebbing strength and failing numbers.
His hand was pierced by a dart; but a young boy at his side instantly withdrew it, and, launching
it back again, slew the foe who had aimed it. Another Dane, seeing the Earl faint and sinking,
advanced to plunder him of his ring and jeweled weapons; but he still had strength to lay the
spoiler low with his battleaxe. This was his last blow; he gathered his strength for one last
cheer to his brave men, and then, sinking on the ground, he looked up to heaven, exclaiming:
'I thank thee, Lord of nations, for all the joys I have known on earth. Now, O mild Creator!
have I the utmost need that Thou shouldst grant grace unto my soul, that my spirit may speed
to Thee with peace, O King of angels! to pass into thy keeping. I sue to Thee that Thou suffer
not the rebel spirits of hell to vex my parting soul!'

With these words he died; but an aged follower, of like spirit, stood over his corpse, and
exhorted his fellows. 'Our spirit shall be the hardier, and our soul the greater, the fewer
our numbers become!' he cried. 'Here lies our chief, the brave, the good, the much-loved lord,
who has blessed us with many a gift. Old as I am, I will not yield, but avenge his death, or
lay me at his side. Shame befall him that thinks to fly from such a field as this!'

Nor did the English warriors fly. Night came down, at last, upon the battlefield, and saved
the lives of the few survivors; but they were forced to leave the body of their lord, and the
Danes bore away with them his head as a trophy, and with it, alas! ten thousand pounds of silver
from the King, who, in his sluggishness and weakness had left Brythnoth to fight and die unaided
for the cause of the whole nation. One of the retainers, a minstrel in the happy old days of
Hadleigh, who had done his part manfully in the battle, had heard these last goodly sayings
of his master, and, living on to peaceful days, loved to rehearse them to the sound of his
harp, and dwell on the glories of one who could die, but not be defeated.

Ere those better days had come, another faithful-hearted Englishman had given his life for
his people. In the year 1012, a huge army, called from their leader, 'Thorkill's Host', were
overrunning Kent, and besieging Canterbury. The Archbishop Aelfeg was earnestly entreated to
leave the city while yet there was time to escape; but he replied, 'None but a hireling would
leave his flock in time of danger;' and he supported the resolution of the inhabitants, so
that they held out the city for twenty days; and as the wild Danes had very little chance against
a well-walled town, they would probably have saved it, had not the gates been secretly opened
to them by the traitorous Abbot Aelfman, whom Aelfeg had once himself saved, when accused of
treason before the King.

The Danes slaughtered all whom they found in the streets, and the Archbishop's friends tried
to keep him in the church, lest he should run upon his fate; but he broke from them, and, confronting
the enemy, cried: 'Spare the guiltless! Is there glory in shedding such blood? Turn your wrath
on me! It is I who have denounced your cruelty, have ransomed and re-clad your captive.' The
Danes seized upon him, and, after he had seen his cathedral burnt and his clergy slain, they
threw him into a dungeon, whence he was told he could only come forth upon the payment of a
heavy ransom.

His flock loved him, and would have striven to raise the sum; but, miserably used as they were
by the enemy, and stripped by the exactions of the Danes, he would not consent that they should
be asked for a further contribution on his account. After seven months' patience in his captivity,
the Danish chiefs, who were then at Greenwich desired him to be brought into their camp, where
they had just been holding a great feast. It was Easter Eve, and the quiet of that day of calm
waiting was disturbed with their songs, and shouts of drunken revelry, as the chained Archbishop
was led to the open space where the warriors sat and lay amid the remains of their rude repast.
The leader then told him that they had agreed to let him off for his own share with a much
smaller payment than had been demanded, provided he would obtain a largesse for them from the
King, his master.

'I am not the man,' he answered, 'to provide Christian flesh for Pagan wolves;' and when again
they repeated the demand, 'Gold I have none to offer you, save the true wisdom of the knowledge
of the living God.' And he began, as he stood in the midst, to 'reason to them of righteousness,
temperance, and judgment to come.'

They were mad with rage and drink. The old man's voice was drowned with shouts of 'Gold, Bishop--give
us gold!' The bones and cups that lay around were hurled at him, and he fell to the ground,
with the cry, 'O Chief Shepherd, guard Thine own children!' As he partly raised himself, axes
were thrown at him; and, at last, a Dane, who had begun to love and listen to him in his captivity,
deemed it mercy to give him a deathblow with an axe. The English maintained that Aelfeg had
died to save his flock from cruel extortion, and held him as a saint and martyr, keeping his
death day (the 19th of April) as a holiday; and when the Italian Archbishop of Canterbury (Lanfranc)
disputed his right to be so esteemed, there was strong opposition and discontent. Indeed, our
own Prayer Book still retains his name, under the altered form of St. Alphege; and surely no
one better merits to be remembered, for having loved his people far better than himself.

GUZMAN EL BUENO

1293

In the early times of Spanish history, before the Moors had been expelled from the peninsula,
or the blight of Western gold had enervated the nation, the old honor and loyalty of the Gothic
race were high and pure, fostered by constant combats with a generous enemy. The Spanish Arabs
were indeed the flower of the Mahometan races, endowed with the vigor and honor of the desert
tribes, yet capable of culture and civilization, excelling all other nations of their time
in science and art, and almost the equals of their Christian foes in the attributes of chivalry.
Wars with them were a constant crusade, consecrated in the minds of the Spaniards as being
in the cause of religion, and yet in some degree freed from savagery and cruelty by the respect
exacted by the honorable character of the enemy, and by the fact that the civilization and
learning of the Christian kingdoms were far more derived from the Moors than from the kindred
nations of Europe.

By the close of the thirteenth century, the Christian kingdoms of Castille and Aragon were
descending from their mountain fastnesses, and spreading over the lovely plains of the south,
even to the Mediterranean coast, as one beautiful Moorish city after another yielded to the
persevering advances of the children of the Goths; and in 1291 the nephew of our own beloved
Eleanor of Castille, Sancho V. called El Bravo, ventured to invest the city of Tarifa.

This was the western buttress of the gate of the Mediterranean, the base of the northern Pillar
of Hercules, and esteemed one of the gates of Spain. By it five hundred years previously had
the Moorish enemy first entered Spain at the summons of Count Julian, under their leader Tarif-
abu-Zearah, whose name was bestowed upon it in remembrance of his landing there. The form of
the ground is said to be like a broken punch bowl, with the broken part towards the sea. The
Moors had fortified the city with a surrounding wall and twenty-six towers, and had built a
castle with a lighthouse on a small adjacent island, called Isla Verde, which they had connected
with the city by a causeway. Their fortifications, always admirable, have existed ever since,
and in 1811, another five hundred years after, were successfully defended against the French
by a small force of British troops under the command of Colonel Hugh Gough, better known in
his old age as the victor of Aliwal. The walls were then unable to support the weight of artillery,
for which of course they had never been built, but were perfectly effective against escalade.

For six months King Sancho besieged Tarifa by land and sea, his fleet, hired from the Genoese,
lying in the waters where the battle of Trafalgar was to be fought. The city at length yielded
under stress of famine, but the King feared that he had no resources to enable him to keep
it, and intended to dismantle and forsake it, when the Grand Master of the military order of
Calatrava offered to undertake the defense with his knights for one year, hoping that some
other noble would come forward at the end of that time and take the charge upon himself.

He was not mistaken. The noble who made himself responsible for this post of danger was a Leonese
knight of high distinction, by name Alonso Perez de Guzman, already called El Bueno, or 'The
Good', from the high qualities he had manifested in the service of the late King, Don Alonso
VI, by whom he had always stood when the present King, Don Sancho, was in rebellion. The offer
was readily accepted, and the whole Guzman family removed to Tarifa, with the exception of
the eldest son, who was in the train of the Infant Don Juan, the second son of the late King,
who had always taken part with his father against his brother, and on Sancho's accession, continued
his enmity, and fled to Portugal.

The King of Portugal, however, being requested by Sancho not to permit him to remain there,
he proceeded to offer his services to the King of Morocco, Yusuf-ben-Yacoub, for whom he undertook
to recover Tarifa, if 5,000 horse were granted to him for the purpose. The force would have
been most disproportionate for the attack of such a city as Tarifa, but Don Juan reckoned on
means that he had already found efficacious; when he had obtained the surrender of Zamora to
his father by threatening to put to death a child of the lady in command of the fortress.

Therefore, after summoning Tarifa at the head of his 5,000 Moors, he led forth before the gates
the boy who had been confided to his care, and declared that unless the city were yielded instantly,
Guzman should behold the death of his own son at his hand! Before, he had had to deal with
a weak woman on a question of divided allegiance. It was otherwise here. The point was whether
the city should be made over to the enemies of the faith and country, whether the plighted
word of a loyal knight should be broken. The boy was held in the grasp of the cruel prince,
stretching out his hands and weeping as he saw his father upon the walls. Don Alonso's eyes,
we are told, filled with tears as he cast one long, last look at his first-born, whom he might
not save except at the expense of his truth and honor.

The struggle was bitter, but he broke forth at last in these words: 'I did not beget a son
to be made use of against my country, but that he should serve her against her foes. Should
Don Juan put him to death, he will but confer honor on me, true life on my son, and on himself
eternal shame in this world and everlasting wrath after death. So far am I from yielding this
place or betraying my trust, that in case he should want a weapon for his cruel purpose, there
goes my knife!'

He cast the knife in his belt over the walls, and returned to the Castle where, commanding
his countenance, he sat down to table with his wife. Loud shouts of horror and dismay almost
instantly called him forth again. He was told that Don Juan had been seen to cut the boy's
throat in a transport of blind rage. 'I thought the enemy had broken in,' he calmly said, and
went back again.

The Moors themselves were horrorstruck at the atrocity of their ally, and as the siege was
hopeless they gave it up; and Don Juan, afraid and ashamed to return to Morocco, wandered to
the Court of Granada.

King Sancho was lying sick at Alcala de Henares when the tidings of the price of Guzman's fidelity
reached him. Touched to the depths of his heart he wrote a letter to his faithful subject,
comparing his sacrifice to that of Abraham, confirming to him the surname of Good, lamenting
his own inability to come and offer his thanks and regrets, but entreating Guzman's presence
at Alcala.

All the way thither, the people thronged to see the man true to his word at such a fearful
cost. The Court was sent out to meet him, and the King, after embracing him, exclaimed, 'Here
learn, ye knights, what are exploits of virtue. Behold your model.'

Lands and honors were heaped upon Alonso de Guzman, and they were not a mockery of his loss,
for he had other sons to inherit them. He was the staunch friend of Sancho's widow and son
in a long and perilous minority, and died full of years and honors. The lands granted to him
were those of Medina Sidonia which lie between the Rivers Guadiana and Guadalquivir, and they
have ever since been held by his descendants, who still bear the honored name of Guzman, witnessing
that the man who gave the life of his first-born rather than break his faith to the King has
left a posterity as noble and enduring as any family in Europe.

FAITHFUL TILL DEATH

1308

One of the ladies most admired by the ancient Romans was Arria, the wife of Caecina Paetus,
a Roman who was condemned by the Emperor Claudius to become his own executioner. Seeing him
waver, his wife, who was resolved to be with him in death as in life, took the dagger from
his hand, plunged it into her own breast, and with her last strength held it out to him, gasping
out, 'It is not painful, my Paetus.'

Such was heathen faithfulness even to death; and where the teaching of Christianity had not
forbidden the taking away of life by one's own hand, perhaps wifely love could not go higher.
Yet Christian women have endured a yet more fearful ordeal to their tender affection, watching,
supporting, and finding unfailing fortitude to uphold the sufferer in agonies that must have
rent their hearts.

Natalia was the fair young wife of Adrian, an officer at Nicomedia, in the guards of the Emperor
Galerius Maximianus, and only about twenty- eight years old. Natalia was a Christian, but her
husband remained a pagan, until, when he was charged with the execution of some martyrs, their
constancy, coupled with the testimony of his own wife's virtues, triumphed over his unbelief,
and he confessed himself likewise a Christian. He was thrown into prison, and sentenced to
death, but he prevailed on his gaoler to permit him to leave the dungeon for a time, that he
might see his wife. The report came to Natalia that he was no longer in prison, and she threw
herself on the ground, lamenting aloud: 'Now will men point at me, and say, 'Behold the wife
of the coward and apostate, who, for fear of death, hath denied his God.'

'Oh, thou noble and strong-hearted woman,' said Adrian's voice at the door, 'I bless God that
I am not unworthy of thee. Open the door that I may bid thee farewell.'

But this was not the last farewell, though he duly went back to the prison; for when, the next
day, he had been cruelly scourged and tortured before the tribunal, Natalia, with her hair
cut short, and wearing the disguise of a youth, was there to tend and comfort him. She took
him in her arms saying, 'Oh, light of mine eyes, and husband of mine heart, blessed art thou,
who art chosen to suffer for Christ's sake.'

On the following day, the tyrant ordered that Adrian's limbs should be one by one struck off
on a blacksmith's anvil, and lastly his head. And still it was his wife who held him and sustained
him through all and, ere the last stroke of the executioner, had received his last breath.
She took up one of the severed hands, kissed it, and placed it in her bosom, and escaping to
Byzantium, there spent her life in widowhood.

Nor among these devoted wives should we pass by Gertrude, the wife of Rudolf, Baron von der
Wart, a Swabian nobleman, who was so ill-advised as to join in a conspiracy of Johann of Hapsburg,
in 1308, against the Emperor, Albrecht I, the son of the great and good Rudolf of Hapsburg.

This Johann was the son of the Emperor's brother Rudolf, a brave knight who had died young,
and Johann had been brought up by a Baron called Walther von Eschenbach, until, at nineteen
years old, he went to his uncle to demand his father's inheritance. Albrecht was a rude and
uncouth man, and refused disdainfully the demand, whereupon the noblemen of the disputed territory
stirred up the young prince to form a plot against him, all having evidently different views
of the lengths to which they would proceed. This was just at the time that the Swiss, angry
at the overweening and oppressive behaviour of Albrecht's governors, were first taking up arms
to maintain that they owed no duty to him as Duke of Austria, but merely as Emperor of Germany.
He set out on his way to chastise them as rebels, taking with him a considerable train, of
whom his nephew Johann was one. At Baden, Johann, as a last experiment, again applied for his
inheritance, but by way of answer, Albrecht held out a wreath of flowers, telling him they
better became his years than did the cares of government. He burst into tears, threw the wreath
upon the ground, and fed his mind upon the savage purpose of letting his uncle find out what
he was fit for.

By and by, the party came to the banks of the Reuss, where there was no bridge, and only one
single boat to carry the whole across. The first to cross were the Emperor with one attendant,
besides his nephew and four of the secret partisans of Johann. Albrecht's son Leopold was left
to follow with the rest of the suite, and the Emperor rode on towards the hills of his home,
towards the Castle of Hapsburg, where his father's noble qualities had earned the reputation
which was the cause of all the greatness of the line. Suddenly his nephew rode up to him, and
while one of the conspirators seized the bridle of his horse, exclaimed, 'Will you now restore
my inheritance?' and wounded him in the neck. The attendant fled; Der Wart, who had never thought
murder was to be a part of the scheme, stood aghast, but the other two fell on the unhappy
Albrecht, and each gave him a mortal wound, and then all five fled in different directions.
The whole horrible affair took place full in view of Leopold and the army on the other side
of the river, and when it became possible for any of them to cross, they found that the Emperor
had just expired, with his head in the lap of a poor woman.

The murderers escaped into the Swiss mountains, expecting shelter there; but the stout, honest
men of the cantons were resolved not to have any connection with assassins, and refused to
protect them. Johann himself, after long and miserable wanderings in disguise, bitterly repented,
owned his crime to the Pope, and was received into a convent; Eschenbach escaped, and lived
fifteen years as a cowherd. The others all fell into the hands of the sons and daughters of
Albrecht, and woeful was the revenge that was taken upon them, and upon their innocent families
and retainers.

That Leopold, who had seen his father slain before his eyes, should have been deeply incensed,
was not wonderful, and his elder brother Frederick, as Duke of Austria, was charged with the
execution of justice; but both brothers were horribly savage and violent in their proceedings,
and their sister Agnes surpassed them in her atrocious thirst for vengeance. She was the wife
of the King of Hungary, very clever and discerning, and also supposed to be very religious,
but all better thoughts were swept away by her furious passion. She had nearly strangled Eschenbach's
infant son with her own bare hands, when he was rescued from her by her own soldiers, and when
she was watching the beheading of sixty-three vassals of another of the murderers, she repeatedly
exclaimed, 'Now I bathe in May dew.' Once, indeed, she met with a stern rebuke. A hermit, for
whom she had offered to build a convent, answered her, 'Woman, God is not served by shedding
innocent blood and by building convents out of the plunder of families, but by compassion and
forgiveness of injuries.'

Rudolf von der Wart received the horrible sentence of being broken on the wheel. On his trial
the Emperor's attendant declared that Der Wart had attacked Albert with his dagger, and the
cry, 'How long will ye suffer this carrion to sit on horseback?' but he persisted to the last
that he had been taken by surprise by the murder. However, there was no mercy for him; and,
by the express command of Queen Agnes, after he had been bound upon one wheel, and his limbs
broken by heavy blows from the executioner, he was fastened to another wheel, which was set
upon a pole, where he was to linger out the remaining hours of his life. His young wife, Gertrude,
who had clung to him through all the trial, was torn away and carried off to the Castle of
Kyburg; but she made her escape at dusk, and found her way, as night came on, to the spot where
her husband hung still living upon the wheel. That night of agony was described in a letter
ascribed to Gertrude herself. The guard left to watch fled at her approach, and she prayed
beneath the scaffold, and then, heaping some heavy logs of wood together, was able to climb
up near enough to embrace him and stroke back the hair from his face, whilst he entreated her
to leave him, lest she should be found there, and fall under the cruel revenge of the Queen,
telling her that thus it would be possible to increase his suffering.

'I will die with you,' she said, 'tis for that I came, and no power shall force me from you;'
and she prayed for the one mercy she hoped for, speedy death for her husband.

In Mrs. Hemans' beautiful words--

'And bid me not depart,' she cried,
  'My Rudolf, say not so;
This is no time to quit thy side,
  Peace, peace, I cannot go!
Hath the world aught for me to fear
  When death is on thy brow?
The world! what means it? Mine is here!
  I will not leave thee now.
'I have been with thee in thine hour
  Of glory and of bliss;
Doubt not its memory's living power
  To strengthen me through this.
And thou, mine honor'd love and true,
  Bear on, bear nobly on;
We have the blessed heaven in view,
  Whose rest shall soon be won.'

When day began to break, the guard returned, and Gertrude took down her stage of wood and continued
kneeling at the foot of the pole. Crowds of people came to look, among them the wife of one
of the officials, whom Gertrude implored to intercede that her husband's sufferings might be
ended; but though this might not be, some pitied her, and tried to give her wine and confections,
which she could not touch. The priest came and exhorted Rudolf to confess the crime, but with
a great effort he repeated his former statement of innocence.

A band of horsemen rode by. Among them was the young Prince Leopold and his sister Agnes herself,
clad as a knight. They were very angry at the compassion shown by the crowd, and after frightfully
harsh language commanded that Gertrude should be dragged away; but one of the nobles interceded
for her, and when she had been carried away to a little distance her entreaties were heard,
and she was allowed to break away and come back to her husband. The priest blessed Gertrude,
gave her his hand and said, 'Be faithful unto death, and God will give you the crown of life,'
and she was no further molested.

Night came on, and with it a stormy wind, whose howling mingled with the voice of her prayers,
and whistled in the hair of the sufferer. One of the guard brought her a cloak. She climbed
on the wheel, and spread the covering over her husband's limbs; then fetched some water in
her shoe, and moistened his lips with it, sustaining him above all with her prayers, and exhortations
to look to the joys beyond. He had ceased to try to send her away, and thanked her for the
comfort she gave him. And still she watched when morning came again, and noon passed over her,
and it was verging to evening, when for the last time he moved his head; and she raised herself
so as to be close to him. With a smile, he murmured, 'Gertrude, this is faithfulness till death,'
and died. She knelt down to thank God for having enabled her to remain for that last breath--

'While even as o'er a martyr's grave
  She knelt on that sad spot,
And, weeping, blessed the God who gave
  Strength to forsake it not!'

She found shelter in a convent at Basle, where she spent the rest of her life in a quiet round
of prayer and good works; till the time came when her widowed heart should find its true rest
for ever.

WHAT IS BETTER THAN SLAYING A DRAGON

1332

The next story we have to tell is so strange and wild, that it would seem better to befit the
cloudy times when history had not yet been disentangled from fable, than the comparatively
clear light of the fourteenth century.

It took place in the island of Rhodes. This Greek isle had become the home of the Knights of
St. John, or Hospitaliers, an order of sworn brethren who had arisen at the time of the Crusades.
At first they had been merely monks, who kept open house for the reception of the poor penniless
pilgrims who arrived at Jerusalem in need of shelter, and often of nursing and healing. The
good monks not only fed and housed them, but did their best to cure the many diseases that
they would catch in the toilsome journey in that feverish climate; and thus it has come to
pass that the word hospitium, which in Latin only means an inn, has, in modern languages, given
birth, on the one hand, to hotel, or lodging house, on the other, to hospital, or house of
healing. The Hospital at Jerusalem was called after St. John the Almoner, a charitable Bishop
of old, and the brethren were Hospitaliers. By and by, when the first Crusade was over, and
there was a great need of warriors to maintain the Christian cause in Jerusalem, the Hospitaliers
thought it a pity that so many strong arms should be prevented from exerting themselves, by
the laws that forbade the clergy to do battle, and they obtained permission from the Pope to
become warriors as well as monks. They were thus all in one--knights, priests, and nurses;
their monasteries were both castles and hospitals; and the sick pilgrim or wounded Crusader
was sure of all the best tendance and medical care that the times could afford, as well as
of all the ghostly comfort and counsel that he might need, and, if he recovered, he was escorted
safely down to the seashore by a party strong enough to protect him from the hordes of robber
Arabs. All this was for charity's sake, and without reward. First I thought I'd go and see.
Then I thought, "Never mind that."

Mind you, I had no cowardly sensations whatever, but it didn't seem exactly prudent to investigate.
But I somehow couldn't keep my eyes off the thing. And the more I looked at it the more disagreeably
it grew on me. But I was resolved to play the man.

So I decided to turn over and count a hundred, and let the patch of moonlight creep up and show
me what the dickens it was.

I turned over and tried to count, but I couldn't keep my mind on it. I kept thinking of that
grewsome mass. I was losing count all the time, and going back and beginning over again. Oh
no; I wasn't frightened--just annoyed. But by the time I'd gotten to the century mark I turned
cautiously over and opened my eyes with great fortitude.

The moonlight revealed to me a marble-white human hand. Well, maybe I wasn't embarrassed! But
then that changed to a creepy feeling again, and I thought I'd try the counting again. I don't
know how many hours or weeks it was that I lay there counting hard. But the moonlight crept up that
white arm, and it showed me a lead face and a terrible wound over the heart.

I could scarcely say that I was terror-stricken or anything like that. But somehow his eyes interested
me so that I went right out of the window. I didn't need the sash. But it seemed easier to
take it than leave it behind.

Now, let that teach you a lesson--I don't know just what it is. But
at seventy years old I find that memory of peculiar value to me.

I have been unconsciously guided by it all these years. Things that seemed pigeon-holed and
remote are a perpetual influence. Yes, you're taught in so many ways. And you're so felicitously
taught when you don't know it.

Here's something else that taught me a good deal.

When I was seventeen I was very bashful, and a sixteen-year-old girl came to stay a week with us.
She was a peach, and I was seized with a happiness not of this world.

One evening my mother suggested that, to entertain her, I take her to the theatre. I didn't
really like to, because I was seventeen and sensitive about appearing
in the streets with a girl.

I couldn't see my way to enjoying my delight in public. But we went.

I didn't feel very happy. I couldn't seem to keep my mind on the play. I became conscious, after
a while, that that was due less to my lovely company than my boots. They were sweet to look
upon, as smooth as skin, but fitted ten time as close.

I got oblivious to the play and the girl and the other people and everything but my boots
until--I hitched one partly off. The sensation was sensuously perfect: I couldn't help it.
I had to get the other off, partly. Then I was obliged to get them off altogether, except that
I kept my feet in the legs so they couldn't get away.

From that time I enjoyed the play. But the first thing I knew the curtain came down, like that, without
my notice, and--I hadn't any boots on. What's more, they wouldn't go on. I tugged strenuously.
And the people in our row got up and fussed and said things until the peach and I simply had
to move on.
We moved--the girl on one arm and the boots under the other.

We
walked home that way, sixteen blocks, with a retinue a mile long:
Every time we passed a lamp-post, death gripped one at the throat.
But we, got home--and I had on white socks.

If I live to be nine
hundred and ninety-nine years old I don't suppose I could ever forget
that walk. I, remember, it about as keenly as the chagrin I suffered
on another occasion.

At one time in our domestic history we had a
colored butler who had a failing. He could never remember to ask people
who came to the door to state their business. So I used to suffer
a good many calls unnecessarily.

One morning when I was especially
busy he brought me a card engraved with a name I did not know. So
I said, "What does he wish to see me for?" and Sylvester said, "Ah
couldn't ask him, sah; he, wuz a genlinun." "Return instantly," I
thundered, "and inquire his mission. Ask him what's his game." Well,
Sylvester returned with the announcement that he had lightning-rods
to sell. "Indeed," said I, "things are coming to a fine pass when
lightning-rod agents send up engraved cards." "He has pictures," added
Sylvester. "Pictures, indeed! He maybe peddling etchings. Has he a
Russia leather case?" But Sylvester was too frightened to remember.
I said; "I am going down to make it hot for that upstart!"

I went
down the stairs, working up my temper all the way.

When he thought the education of horse and dogs complete, he returned to Rhodes; but fearing
to be prevented from carrying out his design, he did not land at the city, but on a remote
part of the coast, whence he made his way to the chapel of St. Stephen. There, after having
recommended himself to God, he left his two French squires, desiring them to return home if
he were slain, but to watch and come to him if he killed the dragon, or were only hurt by it.
He then rode down the hillside, and towards the haunt of the dragon. It roused itself at his
advance, and at first he charged it with his lance, which was perfectly useless against the
scales. His horse was quick to perceive the difference between the true and the false monster,
and started back, so that he was forced to leap to the ground; but the two dogs were more staunch,
and sprang at the animal, whilst their master struck at it with his sword, but still without
reaching a vulnerable part, and a blow from the tail had thrown him down, and the dragon was
turning upon him, when the movement left the undefended belly exposed. Both mastiffs fastened
on it at once, and the knight, regaining his feet, thrust his sword into it. There was a death
grapple, and finally the servants, coming down the hill, found their knight lying apparently
dead under the carcass of the dragon. When they had extricated him, taken off his helmet, and
sprinkled him with water, he recovered, and presently was led into the city amid the ecstatic
shouts of the whole populace, who conducted him in triumph to the palace of the Grand Master.

We have seen how Titus Manlius was requited by his father for his breach of discipline. It
was somewhat in the same manner that Helion de Villeneuve received Dieudonne. We borrow Schiller's
beautiful version of the conversation that took place, as the young knight, pale, with his
black mantle rent, his shining armor dinted, his scarlet surcoat stained with blood, came into
the Knights' Great Hall.

'Severe and grave was the Master's brow,
Quoth he, 'A hero bold art thou,
By valor 't is that knights are known;
A valiant spirit hast thou shown;
But the first duty of a knight,
Now tell, who vows for CHRIST to fight
And bears the Cross on his coat of mail.'
The listeners all with fear grew pale,
While, bending lowly, spake the knight,
  His cheeks with blushes burning,
'He who the Cross would bear aright
  Obedience must be learning.'

Even after hearing the account of the conflict, the Grand Master did not abate his displeasure.

'My son, the spoiler of the land
Lies slain by thy victorious hand
Thou art the people's god, but so
Thou art become thine Order's foe;
A deadlier foe thine heart has bred
Than this which by thy hand is dead,
That serpent still the heart defiling
To ruin and to strife beguiling,
It is that spirit rash and bold,
  That scorns the bands of order;
Rages against them uncontrolled
  Till earth is in disorder.

'Courage by Saracens is shown,
Submission is the Christian's own;
And where our Saviour, high and holy,
Wandered a pilgrim poor and lowly
Upon that ground with mystery fraught,
The fathers of our Order taught
The duty hardest to fulfil
Is to give up your own self-will
Thou art elate with glory vain.
  Away then from my sight!
Who can his Saviour's yoke disdain
  Bears not his Cross aright.'

'An angry cry burst from the crowd,
The hall rang with their tumult loud;
Each knightly brother prayed for grace.
The victor downward bent his face,
Aside his cloak in silence laid,
Kissed the Grand Master's hand, nor stayed.
The Master watched him from the hall,
Then summoned him with loving call,
'Come to embrace me, noble son,
  Thine is the conquest of the soul;
Take up the Cross, now truly won,
  By meekness and by self-control.'

The probation of Dieudonne is said to have been somewhat longer than the poem represents, but
after the claims of discipline had been established, he became a great favorite with stern
old Villeneuve, and the dragon's head was set up over the gate of the city, where Thèvenot
professed to have seen it in the seventeenth century, and said that it was larger than that
of a horse, with a huge mouth and teeth and very large eyes. The name of Rhodes is said to
come from a Phoenician word, meaning a serpent, and the Greeks called this isle of serpents,
which is all in favor of the truth of the story. But, on the other hand, such traditions often
are prompted by the sight of the fossil skeletons of the dragons of the elder world, and are
generally to be met with where such minerals prevail as are found in the northern part of Rhodes.
The tale is disbelieved by many, but it is hard to suppose it an entire invention, though the
description of the monster may have been exaggerated.

Dieudonne de Gozon was elected to the Grand Mastership after the death of Villeneuve, and is
said to have voted for himself. If so, it seems as if he might have had, in his earlier days,
an overweening opinion of his own abilities. However, he was an excellent Grand Master, a great
soldier, and much beloved by all the poor peasants of the island, to whom he was exceedingly
kind. He died in 1353, and his tomb is said to have been the only inscribed with these words,
'Here lies the Dragon Slayer.'

THE KEYS OF CALAIS

1347

Nowhere does the continent of Europe approach Great Britain so closely as at the straits of
Dover, and when our sovereigns were full of the vain hope of obtaining the crown of France,
or at least of regaining the great possessions that their forefathers has owned as French nobles,
there was no spot so coveted by them as the fortress of Calais, the possession of which gave
an entrance into France.

Thus it was that when, in 1346, Edward III. had beaten Philippe VI. at the battle of Crecy,
the first use he made of his victory was to march upon Calais, and lay siege to it. The walls
were exceedingly strong and solid, mighty defenses of masonry, of huge thickness and like rocks
for solidity, guarded it, and the king knew that it would be useless to attempt a direct assault.
Indeed, during all the Middle Ages, the modes of protecting fortifications were far more efficient
than the modes of attacking them. The walls could be made enormously massive, the towers raised
to a great height, and the defenders so completely sheltered by battlements that they could
not easily be injured and could take aim from the top of their turrets, or from their loophole
windows. The gates had absolute little castles of their own, a moat flowed round the walls
full of water, and only capable of being crossed by a drawbridge, behind which the portcullis,
a grating armed beneath with spikes, was always ready to drop from the archway of the gate
and close up the entrance. The only chance of taking a fortress by direct attack was to fill
up the moat with earth and faggots, and then raise ladders against the walls; or else to drive
engines against the defenses, battering-rams which struck them with heavy beams, mangonels
which launched stones, sows whose arched wooden backs protected troops of workmen who tried
to undermine the wall, and moving towers consisting of a succession of stages or shelves, filled
with soldiers, and with a bridge with iron hooks, capable of being launched from the highest
story to the top of the battlements. The besieged could generally disconcert the battering-
ram by hanging beds or mattresses over the walls to receive the brunt of the blow, the sows
could be crushed with heavy stones, the towers burnt by well-directed flaming missiles, the
ladders overthrown, and in general the besiegers suffered a great deal more damage than they
could inflict. Cannon had indeed just been brought into use at the battle of Crecy, but they
only consisted of iron bars fastened together with hoops, and were as yet of little use, and
thus there seemed to be little danger to a well-guarded city from any enemy outside the walls.

King Edward arrived before the place with all his victorious army early in August, his good
knights and squires arrayed in glittering steel armor, covered with surcoats richly embroidered
with their heraldic bearings; his stout men-at-arms, each of whom was attended by three bold
followers; and his archers, with their crossbows to shoot bolts, and longbows to shoot arrows
of a yard long, so that it used to be said that each went into battle with three men's lives
under his girdle, namely, the three arrows he kept there ready to his hand. With the King was
his son, Edward, Prince of Wales, who had just won the golden spurs of knighthood so gallantly
at Crecy, when only in his seventeenth year, and likewise the famous Hainault knight, Sir Walter
Mauny, and all that was noblest and bravest in England.

This whole glittering army, at their head the King's great royal standard bearing the golden
lilies of France quartered with the lions of England, and each troop guided by the square banner,
swallow-tailed pennon or pointed pennoncel of their leader, came marching to the gates of Calais,
above which floated the blue standard of France with its golden flowers, and with it the banner
of the governor, Sir Jean de Vienne. A herald, in a rich long robe embroidered with the arms
of England, rode up to the gate, a trumpet sounding before him, and called upon Sir Jean de
Vienne to give up the place to Edward, King of England, and of France, as he claimed to be.
Sir Jean made answer that he held the town for Philippe, King of France, and that he would
defend it to the last; the herald rode back again and the English began the siege of the city.

At first they only encamped, and the people of Calais must have seen the whole plain covered
with the white canvas tents, marshalled round the ensigns of the leaders, and here and there
a more gorgeous one displaying the colours of the owner. Still there was no attack upon the
walls. The warriors were to be seen walking about in the leathern suits they wore under their
armor; or if a party was to be seen with their coats of mail on, helmet on head, and lance
in hand, it was not against Calais that they came; they rode out into the country, and by and
by might be seen driving back before them herds of cattle and flocks of sheep or pigs that
they had seized and taken away from the poor peasants; and at night the sky would show red
lights where farms and homesteads had been set on fire. After a time, in front of the tents,
the English were to be seen hard at work with beams and boards, setting up huts for themselves,
and thatching them over with straw or broom. These wooden houses were all ranged in regular
streets, and there was a marketplace in the midst, whither every Saturday came farmers and
butchers to sell corn and meat, and hay for the horses; and the English merchants and Flemish
weavers would come by sea and by land to bring cloth, bread, weapons, and everything that could
be needed to be sold in this warlike market.

The Governor, Sir Jean de Vienne, began to perceive that the King did not mean to waste his
men by making vain attacks on the strong walls of Calais, but to shut up the entrance by land,
and watch the coast by sea so as to prevent any provisions from being taken in, and so to starve
him into surrendering. Sir Jean de Vienne, however, hoped that before he should be entirely
reduced by famine, the King of France would be able to get together another army and come to
his relief, and at any rate he was determined to do his duty, and hold out for his master to
the last. But as food was already beginning to grow scarce, he was obliged to turn out such
persons as could not fight and had no stores of their own, and so one Wednesday morning he
caused all the poor to be brought together, men, women, and children, and sent them all out
of the town, to the number of 1,700. It was probably the truest mercy, for he had no food to
give them, and they could only have starved miserably within the town, or have hindered him
from saving it for his sovereign; but to them it was dreadful to be driven out of house and
home, straight down upon the enemy, and they went along weeping and wailing, till the English
soldiers met them and asked why they had come out. They answered that they had been put out
because they had nothing to eat, and their sorrowful, famished looks gained pity for them.
King Edward sent orders that not only should they go safely through his camp, but that they
should all rest, and have the first hearty dinner that they had eaten for many a day, and he
sent every one a small sum of money before they left the camp, so that many of them went on
their way praying aloud for the enemy who had been so kind to them.

A great deal happened whilst King Edward kept watch in his wooden town and the citizens of
Calais guarded their walls. England was invaded by King David II. of Scotland, with a great
army, and the good Queen Philippa, who was left to govern at home in the name of her little
son Lionel, assembled all the forces that were left at home, and crossed the Straits of Dover,
and a messenger brought King Edward letters from his Queen to say that the Scots army had been
entirely defeated at Nevil's Cross, near Durham, and that their King was a prisoner, but that
he had been taken by a squire named John Copeland, who would not give him up to her.

King Edward sent letters to John Copeland to come to him at Calais, and when the squire had
made his journey, the King took him by the hand saying, 'Ha! welcome, my squire, who by his
valor has captured our adversary the King of Scotland.'

Copeland, falling on one knee, replied, 'If God, out of His great kindness, has given me the
King of Scotland, no one ought to be jealous of it, for God can, when He pleases, send His
grace to a poor squire as well as to a great Lord. Sir, do not take it amiss if I did not surrender
him to the orders of my lady the Queen, for I hold my lands of you, and my oath is to you,
not to her.'

The King was not displeased with his squire's sturdiness, but made him a knight, gave him a
pension of 500l. a year, and desired him to surrender his prisoner to the Queen, as his own
representative. This was accordingly done, and King David was lodged in the Tower of London.
Soon after, three days before All Saint's Day, there was a large and gay fleet to be seen crossing
from the white cliffs of Dover, and the King, his son, and his knights rode down to the landing
place to welcome plump, fair haired Queen Philippa, and all her train of ladies, who had come
in great numbers to visit their husbands, fathers, or brothers in the wooden town.

Then there was a great Court, and numerous feasts and dances, and the knights and squires were
constantly striving who could do the bravest deed of prowess to please the ladies. The King
of France had placed numerous knights and men-at-arms in the neighboring towns and castles,
and there were constant fights whenever the English went out foraging, and many bold deeds
that were much admired were done. The great point was to keep provisions out of the town, and
there was much fighting between the French who tried to bring in supplies, and the English
who intercepted them. Very little was brought in by land, and Sir Jean de Vienne and his garrison
would have been quite starved but for two sailors of Abbeville, named Marant and Mestriel,
who knew the coast thoroughly, and often, in the dark autumn evenings, would guide in a whole
fleet of little boats, loaded with bread and meat for the starving men within the city. They
were often chased by King Edward's vessels, and were sometimes very nearly taken, but they
always managed to escape, and thus they still enabled the garrison to hold out.

So all the winter passed, Christmas was kept with brilliant feastings and high merriment by
the King and his Queen in their wooden palace outside, and with lean cheeks and scanty fare
by the besieged within. Lent was strictly observed perforce by the besieged, and Easter brought
a betrothal in the English camp; a very unwilling one on the part of the bridegroom, the young
Count of Flanders, who loved the French much better than the English, and had only been tormented
into giving his consent by his unruly vassals because they depended on the wool of English
sheep for their cloth works. So, though King Edward's daughter Isabel was a beautiful fair-haired
girl of fifteen, the young Count would scarcely look at her; and in the last week before the
marriage day, while her robes and her jewels were being prepared, and her father and mother
were arranging the presents they should make to all their Court on the wedding day, the bridegroom,
when out hawking, gave his attendants the slip, and galloped off to Paris, where he was welcomed
by King Philippe.

This made Edward very wrathful, and more than ever determined to take Calais. About Whitsuntide
he completed a great wooden castle upon the seashore, and placed in it numerous warlike engines,
with forty men-at- arms and 200 archers, who kept such a watch upon the harbour that not even
the two Abbeville sailors could enter it, without having their boats crushed and sunk by the
great stones that the mangonels launched upon them. The townspeople began to feel what hunger
really was, but their spirits were kept up by the hope that their King was at last collecting
an army for their rescue.

And Philippe did collect all his forces, a great and noble army, and came one night to the
hill of Sangate, just behind the English army, the knights' armor glancing and their pennons
flying in the moonlight, so as to be a beautiful sight to the hungry garrison who could see
the white tents pitched upon the hillside. Still there were but two roads by which the French
could reach their friends in the town--one along the seacoast, the other by a marshy road higher
up the country, and there was but one bridge by which the river could be crossed. The English
King's fleet could prevent any troops from passing along the coast road, the Earl of Derby
guarded the bridge, and there was a great tower, strongly fortified, close upon Calais. There
were a few skirmishes, but the French King, finding it difficult to force his way to relieve
the town, sent a party of knights with a challenge to King Edward to come out of his camp and
do battle upon a fair field.

To this Edward made answer, that he had been nearly a year before Calais, and had spent large
sums of money on the siege, and that he had nearly become master of the place, so that he had
no intention of coming out only to gratify his adversary, who must try some other road if he
could not make his way in by that before him.

Three days were spent in parleys, and then, without the slightest effort to rescue the brave,
patient men within the town, away went King Philippe of France, with all his men, and the garrison
saw the host that had crowded the hill of Sangate melt away like a summer cloud.

August had come again, and they had suffered privation for a whole year for the sake of the
King who deserted them at their utmost need. They were in so grievous a state of hunger and
distress that the hardiest could endure no more, for ever since Whitsuntide no fresh provisions
had reached them. The Governor, therefore, went to the battlements and made signs that he wished
to hold a parley, and the King appointed Lord Basset and Sir Walter Mauny to meet him, and
appoint the terms of surrender.

The Governor owned that the garrison was reduced to the greatest extremity of distress, and
requested that the King would be contented with obtaining the city and fortress, leaving the
soldiers and inhabitants to depart in peace.

But Sir Walter Mauny was forced to make answer that the King, his lord, was so much enraged
at the delay and expense that Calais had cost him, that he would only consent to receive the
whole on unconditional terms, leaving him free to slay, or to ransom, or make prisoners whomsoever
he pleased, and he was known to consider that there was a heavy reckoning to pay, both for
the trouble the siege had cost him and the damage the Calesians had previously done to his ships.

The brave answer was: 'These conditions are too hard for us. We are but a small number of knights
and squires, who have loyally served our lord and master as you would have done, and have suffered
much ill and disquiet, but we will endure far more than any man has done in such a post, before
we consent that the smallest boy in the town shall fare worse than ourselves. I therefore entreat
you, for pity's sake, to return to the King and beg him to have compassion, for I have such
an opinion of his gallantry that I think he will alter his mind.'

The King's mind seemed, however, sternly made up; and all that Sir Walter Mauny and the barons
of the council could obtain from him was that he would pardon the garrison and townsmen on
condition that six of the chief citizens should present themselves to him, coming forth with
bare feet and heads, with halters round their necks, carrying the keys of the town, and becoming
absolutely his own to punish for their obstinacy as he should think fit.

On hearing this reply, Sir Jean de Vienne begged Sir Walter Mauny to wait till he could consult
the citizens, and, repairing to the marketplace, he caused a great bell to be rung, at sound
of which all the inhabitants came together in the town hall. When he told them of these hard
terms he could not refrain from weeping bitterly, and wailing and lamentation arose all round
him. Should all starve together, or sacrifice their best and most honored after all suffering
in common so long?

Then a voice was heard; it was that of the richest burgher in the town, Eustache de St. Pierre.
'Messieurs high and low,' he said, 'it would be a sad pity to suffer so many people to die
through hunger, if it could be prevented; and to hinder it would be meritorious in the eyes
of our Saviour. I have such faith and trust in finding grace before God, if I die to save my
townsmen, that I name myself as the first of the six.'

As the burgher ceased, his fellow townsmen wept aloud, and many, amid tears and groans, threw
themselves at his feet in a transport of grief and gratitude. Another citizen, very rich and
respected, rose up and said, 'I will be second to my comrade, Eustache.' His name was Jean
Daire. After him, Jacques Wissant, another very rich man, offered himself as companion to these,
who were both his cousins; and his brother Pierre would not be left behind: and two more, unnamed,
made up this gallant band of men willing to offer their lives for the rescue of their fellow
townsmen.

Sir Jean de Vienne mounted a little horse--for he had been wounded, and was still lame--and
came to the gate with them, followed by all the people of the town, weeping and wailing, yet,
for their own sakes and their children's not daring to prevent the sacrifice. The gates were
opened, the governor and the six passed out, and the gates were again shut behind them. Sir
Jean then rode up to Sir Walter Mauny, and told him how these burghers had voluntarily offered
themselves, begging him to do all in his power to save them; and Sir Walter promised with his
whole heart to plead their cause. De Vienne then went back into the town, full of heaviness
and anxiety; and the six citizens were led by Sir Walter to the presence of the King, in his
full Court. They all knelt down, and the foremost said: 'Most gallant King, you see before
you six burghers of Calais, who have all been capital merchants, and who bring you the keys
of the castle and town. We yield ourselves to your absolute will and pleasure, in order to
save the remainder of the inhabitants of Calais, who have suffered much distress and misery.
Condescend, therefore, out of your nobleness of mind, to have pity on us.'

Strong emotion was excited among all the barons and knights who stood round, as they saw the
resigned countenances, pale and thin with patiently endured hunger, of these venerable men,
offering themselves in the cause of their fellow townsmen. Many tears of pity were shed; but
the King still showed himself implacable, and commanded that they should be led away, and their
heads stricken off. Sir Walter Mauny interceded for them with all his might, even telling the
King that such an execution would tarnish his honor, and that reprisals would be made on his
own garrisons; and all the nobles joined in entreating pardon for the citizens, but still without
effect; and the headsman had been actually sent for, when Queen Philippa, her eyes streaming
with tears, threw herself on her knees amongst the captives, and said, 'Ah, gentle sir, since
I have crossed the sea, with much danger, to see you, I have never asked you one favor; now
I beg as a boon to myself, for the sake of the Son of the Blessed Mary, and for your love to
me, that you will be merciful to these men!'

For some time the King looked at her in silence; then he exclaimed: 'Dame, dame, would that
you had been anywhere than here! You have entreated in such a manner that I cannot refuse you;
I therefore give these men to you, to do as you please with.'

Joyfully did Queen Philippa conduct the six citizens to her own apartments, where she made
them welcome, sent them new garments, entertained them with a plentiful dinner, and dismissed
them each with a gift of six nobles. After this, Sir Walter Mauny entered the city, and took
possession of it; retaining Sir Jean de Vienne and the other knights and squires till they
should ransom themselves, and sending out the old French inhabitants; for the King was resolved
to people the city entirely of English, in order to gain a thoroughly strong hold of this first
step in France.

The King and Queen took up their abode in the city; and the houses of Jean Daire were, it appears,
granted to the Queen--perhaps, because she considered the man himself as her charge, and wished
to secure them for him--and her little daughter Margaret was, shortly after, born in one of
his houses. Eustache de St. Pierre was taken into high favor, and placed in charge of the new
citizens whom the King placed in the city.

Indeed, as this story is told by no chronicler but Froissart, some have doubted of it, and
thought the violent resentment thus imputed to Edward III inconsistent with his general character;
but it is evident that the men of Calais had given him strong provocation by attacks on his
shipping--piracies which are not easily forgiven--and that he considered that he had a right
to make an example of them. It is not unlikely that he might, after all, have intended to forgive
them, and have given the Queen the grace of obtaining their pardon, so as to excuse himself
from the fulfillment of some over-hasty threat. But, however this may have been, nothing can
lessen the glory of the six grave and patient men who went forth, by their own free will, to
meet what might be a cruel and disgraceful death, in order to obtain the safety of their fellow-
townsmen.

Very recently, in the summer of 1864, an instance has occurred of self- devotion worthy to
be recorded with that of Eustache de St. Pierre. The City of Palmyra, in Tennessee, one of
the Southern States of America, had been occupied by a Federal army. An officer of this army
was assassinated, and, on the cruel and mistaken system of taking reprisals, the general arrested
ten of the principal inhabitants, and condemned them to be shot, as deeming the city responsible
for the lives of his officers. One of them was the highly respected father of a large family,
and could ill be spared. A young man, not related to him, upon this, came forward and insisted
on being taken in his stead, as a less valuable life. And great as was the distress of his
friend, this generous substitution was carried out, and not only spared a father to his children,
but showed how the sharpest strokes of barbarity can still elicit light from the dark stone--light
that but for these blows might have slept unseen.

THE BATTLE OF SEMPACH

1397

Nothing in history has been more remarkable than the union of the cantons and cities of the
little republic of Switzerland. Of differing races, languages, and, latterly, even religions--unlike
in habits, tastes, opinions and costumes--they have, however, been held together, as it were,
by pressure from without, and one spirit of patriotism has kept the little mountain republic
complete for five hundred years.

Originally the lands were fiefs of the Holy Roman Empire, the city municipalities owning the
Emperor for their lord, and the great family of Hapsburg, in whom the Empire became at length
hereditary, was in reality Swiss, the county that gave them title lying in the canton of Aargau.
Rodolf of Hapsburg was elected leader of the burghers of Zurich, long before he was chosen
to the Empire; and he continued a Swiss in heart, retaining his mountaineer's open simplicity
and honesty to the end of his life. Privileges were granted by him to the cities and the nobles,
and the country was loyal and prosperous in his reign.

His son Albert, the same who was slain by his nephew Johann, as before- mentioned, permitted
those tyrannies of his bailiffs which goaded the Swiss to their celebrated revolt, and commenced
the long series of wars with the House of Hapsburgor, as it was now termed, of Austria--which
finally established their independence.

On the one side, the Dukes of Austria and their ponderous German chivalry wanted to reduce
the cantons and cities to vassalage, not to the Imperial Crown, a distant and scarcely felt
obligation, but to the Duchy of Austria; on the other, the hardy mountain peasants and stout
burghers well knew their true position, and were aware that to admit the Austrian usurpation
would expose their young men to be drawn upon for the Duke's wars, cause their property to
be subject to perpetual rapacious exactions, and fill their hills with castles for ducal bailiffs,
who would be little better than licensed robbers. No wonder, then, that the generations of
William Tell and Arnold Melchthal bequeathed a resolute purpose of resistance to their descendants.

It was in 1397, ninety years since the first assertion of Swiss independence, when Leopold
the Handsome, Duke of Austria, a bold but misproud and violent prince, involved himself in
one of the constant quarrels with the Swiss that were always arising on account of the insulting
exactions of toll and tribute in the Austrian border cities. A sharp war broke out, and the
Swiss city of Lucerne took the opportunity of destroying the Austrian castle of Rothemburg,
where the tolls had been particularly vexatious, and of admitting to their league the cities
of Sempach and Richensee.

Leopold and all the neighboring nobles united their forces. Hatred and contempt of the Swiss,
as low-born and presumptuous, spurred them on; and twenty messengers reached the Duke in one
day, with promises of support, in his march against Sempach and Lucerne. He had sent a large
force in the direction of Zurich with Johann Bonstetten, and advanced himself with 4,000 horse
and 1,400 foot upon Sempach. Zurich undertook its own defense, and the Forest cantons sent
their brave peasants to the support of Lucerne and Sempach, but only to the number of 1,300,
who, on the 9th of July, took post in the woods around the little lake of Sempach.

Meanwhile, Leopold's troops rode round the walls of the little city, insulting the inhabitants,
one holding up a halter, which he said was for the chief magistrate; and another, pointing
to the reckless waste that his comrades were perpetrating on the fields, shouted, 'Send a breakfast
to the reapers.' The burgomaster pointed to the wood where his allies lay hid, and answered,
'My masters of Lucerne and their friends will bring it.'

The story of that day was told by one of the burghers who fought in the ranks of Lucerne, a
shoemaker, named Albert Tchudi, who was both a brave warrior and a master-singer; and as his
ballad was translated by another master-singer, Sir Walter Scott, and is the spirited record
of an eyewitness, we will quote from him some of his descriptions of the battle and its golden
deed.

The Duke's wiser friends proposed to wait till he could be joined by Bonstetten and the troops
who had gone towards Zurich, and the Baron von Hasenburg (i.e. hare-rock) strongly urged this
prudent counsel; but--

'O, Hare-Castle, thou heart of hare!'
  Fierce Oxenstiern he cried,
'Shalt see then how the game will fare,'
  The taunted knight replied.'

'This very noon,' said the younger knight to the Duke, 'we will deliver up to you this handful
of villains.'

'And thus they to each other said,
  'Yon handful down to hew
Will be no boastful tale to tell
  The peasants are so few.'

Characteristically enough, the doughty cobbler describes how the first execution that took
place was the lopping off the long-peaked toes of the boots that the gentlemen wore chained
to their knees, and which would have impeded them on foot; since it had been decided that the
horses were too much tired to be serviceable in the action.

'There was lacing then of helmets bright,
  And closing ranks amain,
The peaks they hewed from their boot points
  Might well nigh load a wain.'

They were drawn up in a solid compact body, presenting an unbroken line of spears, projecting
beyond the wall of gay shields and polished impenetrable armor. 

The four subsequent volumes were published in 1623 under the title, Hakluytius Posthumous, or,
Purchas: His Pilgrimes.

Among these three compilers Hakluyt enjoys pre-eminence, and the Hakluyt
Society has supplemented his labors by publishing in full some of
the narratives which Hakluyt, for reasons of accuracy or want of space,
abbreviated.

The Historie of Travaile into Virginia,
  by William Strachey, secretary
to Lord Delaware, was published by
  the Hakluyt Society in 1848, and this book contains excellent accounts
of the expeditions sent by Sir Walter Raleigh to Roanoke, the voyages
of Bartholomew Gosnold and George Weymouth, and the settlement made
under its charter by the Plymouth Company at Sagadahoc, or Kennebec.

George Sainsbury, the editor, was a master at catching the salient
points of a manuscript.

Many of his abstracts have elsewhere been published in full.

VIRGINIA

The standard authorities for the history of Virginia are Robert Beverley, History of Virginia
(1722) (extends to Spotswood's administration); William Stith, History
of Virginia (1747) (period of the London Company); John D. Burk, History
of Virginia (4 vols., 1805); R.R. Howison, History of Virginia (2
vols., 1846); Charles Campbell, History of the Colony and Ancient
Dominion of Virginia (1847); and Jonn Fiske, Old Virginia and Her
Neighbors (1900).

For the period Stith is by far the
  most important. His work
covers the duration of the London
  Company, and as he had access
to manuscripts now destroyed the history
  has the value of an
original document. As president of William
  and Mary College Stith was an
accomplished scholar, and his work,
  pervaded with a broad, philosophic
spirit, ranks perhaps first among colonial
  histories.

As a mere collection of facts upon the whole colonial history of Virginia Campbell's work is
the most useful. The greatest collection of original material bearing upon the first ten years
of the colony's history is in Alexander Brown, Genesis of the United States (2 vols., 1890).
This remarkable work contains an introductory sketch of what has been done by Englishmen prior to
1606 in the way of discovery and colonization, and a catalogue of charters, letters, and pamphlets
(many of them republished at length) through which the events attending the first foundation
of an English colony in the New World are developed in order of time. Dr. Brown's other works,
The First Republic in America (1898), and English Politics in America
(1901) make excellent companion pieces to the Genesis, though the
author has made a great mistake in not supporting his text with foot-notes
and references.

  
Among the contemporary writers, John
  Smith, Works (1884), edited by Edward Arber, is a compilation rather
than a history, and in spite of its partisan coloring contains much
that is valuable regarding Virginia affairs from 1607 to 1629.

For matters from 1619-1624 we have the sure guide of the London Company's Journal, in Virginia
Historical Society, Collections, new series, VII. After that time the main dependence, apart
from the Calendar of State Papers, is Hening, Statutes at Large of Virginia (13 vols., 1823). The
works of Edward D. Neill are also of a documentary nature and of much value. Those which bear upon
Virginia are The Virginia Company (1868), Virginia Carolorum (1886), Virginia Vestusta (1885), and
Virginia and Virginiola (1878).

Many tracts are cited in the foot-notes.

  MARYLAND

  The standard authorities for the history of Maryland are J.V.L. McMahon,
Historical View of the Government of Maryland (1831); John Leeds Bozman,
History of Maryland (2 vols., 1837, covering the period of 1634 to
1658); James McSherry, History of Maryland (1849); J.T. Scharf, History
of Maryland (3 vols., 1879); William Hand Browne, History of Maryland
(1893), and George and Cecilius Calvert (1893); Edward D. Neill, Founders
of Maryland (1876), and Terra Mariæ (1867).

Of these Bozman's work is an invaluable magazine of information, being, in fact, as much a
calendar of documents as a continuous narrative. William Hand Browne's books show great familiarity
with the story of Maryland and its founders, but his treatment of the subject is marked by strong
bias and partisanship in favor of Lord Baltimore and his government. Neill's books, on the other hand,
argue strongly in favor of the Puritan influence on the history of Maryland. There are many interesting
pamphlets relating to Maryland in the series of Johns Hopkins University Studies, such as Edward
Ingle, Parish Institutions of Maryland, I., No. vi.; John Hensley Johnson, Old Maryland Manors,
I., No. vii.; Lewis W. Wilhelm, Maryland Local Institutions, III., Nos. v., vi., vii.; D.R. Randall,
The Puritan Colony at Annapolis, Maryland, IV., No. vi.; J.H. Latané, Early Relations of Virginia
and Maryland, XIII., Nos. iii., iv., and Bernard C. Steiner, The Beginnings of Maryland.

The documentary material of Maryland is very extensive, as the State
has been fortunate in preserving most of its colonial records.

 Their entreaty was, not to be carpet--knights
dubbed in time of peace, and King Joao on the other hand objected to entering on a war merely
for the sake of knighting his sons. At last Dom Fernando, the youngest of the brothers, a lad
of fourteen, proposed that their knighthood should be earned by an expedition to take Ceuta
from the Moors. A war with the infidel never came amiss, and was in fact regarded as a sacred
duty; moreover, Ceuta was a nest of corsairs who infested the whole Mediterranean coast. Up
to the nineteenth century the seaports along the African coast of the Mediterranean were the
hives of pirates, whose small rapid vessels were the terror of every unarmed ship that sailed
in those waters, and whose descents upon the coasts of Spain, France, and Italy rendered life
and property constantly insecure. A regular system of kidnapping prevailed; prisoners had their
fixed price, and were carried off to labour in the African dockyards, or to be chained to the
benches of the Moorish ships which their oars propelled, until either a ransom could be procured
from their friends, or they could be persuaded to become renegades, or death put an end to
their sufferings. A captivity among the Moors was by no means an uncommon circumstance even
in the lives of Englishmen down to the eighteenth century, and pious persons frequently bequeathed
sums of money for the ransom of the poorer captives.

Ceuta, perched upon the southern Pillar of Hercules, was one of the most perilous of these
dens of robbery, and to seize it might well appear a worthy action, not only to the fiery princes,
but to their cautious father. He kept his designs absolutely secret, and contrived to obtain
a plan of the town by causing one of his vessels to put in there as in quest of provisions,
while, to cover his preparations for war, he sent a public challenge to the Count of Holland,
and a secret message at the same time, with the assurance that it was only a blind. These proceedings
were certainly underhand, and partook of treachery; but they were probably excused in the King's
own mind by the notion, that no faith was to be kept with unbelievers, and, moreover, such
people as the Ceutans were likely never to be wanting in the supply of pretexts for attack.

Just as all was ready, the plague broke out in Lisbon, and the Queen fell sick of it. Her husband
would not leave her, and just before her death she sent for all her sons, and gave to each
a sword, charging them to defend the widow and orphan, and to fight against the infidel. In
the full freshness of their sorrow, the King and his sons set sail from the Bay of Lagos, in
the August of 1415, with 59 galleys, 33 ships of war, and 120 transports; the largest fleet
ever yet sent forth by the little kingdom, and the first that had left a Peninsular port with
the banners and streamers of which the more northern armaments were so profuse.

The governor of Ceuta, Zala ben Zala, was not unprepared for the attack, and had collected
5,000 allies to resist the Christians; but a great storm having dispersed the fleet on the
first day of its appearance, he thought the danger over, and dismissed his friends On the 14th
August, however, the whole fleet again appeared, and the King, in a little boat, directed the
landing of his men, led by his sons, the Infantes Duarte and Henrique. The Moors gave way before
them, and they entered the city with 500 men, among the flying enemy, and there, after a period
of much danger, were joined by their brother Pedro. The three fought their way to a mosque,
where they defended themselves till the King with the rest of his army made their way in. Zala
ben Zala fled to the citadel, but, after one assault, quitted it in the night.

The Christian captives were released, the mosque purified and consecrated as a cathedral, a
bishop was appointed, and the King gave the government of the place to Dom Pedro de Menezes,
a knight of such known fidelity that the King would not suffer him to take the oath of allegiance.
An attempt was made by the Moors four years later to recover the place; but the Infantes Pedro
and Henrique hurried from Portugal to succor Menezes, and drove back the besiegers; whereupon
the Moors murdered their King, Abu Sayd, on whom they laid the blame of the disaster.

On the very day, eighteen years later, of the taking of Ceuta, King Joao died of the plague
at Lisbon, on the 14th of August, 1433. Duarte came to the throne; and, a few months after,
his young brother, Fernando, persuaded him into fitting out another expedition to Africa, of
which Tangier should be the object.

Duarte doubted of the justice of the war, and referred the question to the Pope, who decided
against it; but the answer came too late, the preparations were made, and the Infantes Henrique
and Fernando took the command. Henrique was a most enlightened prince, a great mathematician
and naval discoverer, but he does not appear to have made good use of his abilities on the
present occasion; for, on arriving at Ceuta, and reviewing the troops, they proved to have
but 8,000, instead of 14,000, as they had intended. Still they proceeded, Henrique by land
and Fernando by sea, and laid siege to Tangier, which was defended by their old enemy, Zala
ben Zala. Everything was against them; their scaling ladders were too short to reach to the
top of the walls, and the Moors had time to collect in enormous numbers for the relief of the
city, under the command of the kings of Fez and Morocco.

The little Christian army was caught as in a net, and, after a day's hard fighting, saw the
necessity of re-embarking. All was arranged for this to be done at night; but a vile traitor,
chaplain to the army, passed over to the Moors, and revealed their intention. The beach was
guarded, and the retreat cut off. Another day of fighting passed, and at night hunger reduced
them to eating their horses.

It was necessary to come to terms, and messengers were sent to treat with the two kings. The
only terms on which the army could be allowed to depart were that one of the Infantes should
remain as a hostage for the delivery of Ceuta to the Moors. For this purpose Fernando offered
himself, though it was exceedingly doubtful whether Ceuta would be restored; and the Spanish
poet, Calderon, puts into his mouth a generous message to his brother the King, that they both
were Christian princes, and that his liberty was not to be weighed in the scale with their
father's fairest conquest.

Henrique was forced thus to leave his brave brother, and return with the remnants of his army
to Ceuta, where he fell sick with grief and vexation. He sent the fleet home; but it met with
a great storm, and many vessels were driven on the coast of Andalusia, where, by orders of
the King, the battered sailors and defeated soldiers were most kindly and generously treated.

Dom Duarte, having in the meantime found out with how insufficient an army his brothers had
been sent forth, had equipped a fresh fleet, the arrival of which at Ceuta cheered Henrique
with hope of rescuing his brother; but it was soon followed by express orders from the King
that Henrique should give up all such projects and return home. He was obliged to comply, but,
unable to look Duarte in the face, he retired to his own estates at the Algarve.

Duarte convoked the States-general of the kingdom, to consider whether Ceuta should be yielded
to purchase his brother's freedom. They decided that the place was too important to be parted
with, but undertook to raise any sum of money for the ransom; and if this were not accepted,
proposed to ask the Pope to proclaim a crusade for his rescue.

At first Fernando was treated well, and kept at Tangier as an honorable prisoner; but disappointment
enraged the Moors, and he was thrown into a dungeon, starved, and maltreated. All this usage
he endured with the utmost calmness and resolution, and could by no means be threatened into
entreating for liberty to be won at the cost of the now Christian city where his knighthood
had been won.

His brother Duarte meantime endeavored to raise the country for his deliverance; but the plague
was still desolating Portugal, so that it was impossible to collect an army, and the infection
at length seized on the King himself, from a letter which he incautiously opened, and he died,
in his thirty-eighth year, in 1438, the sixth year of his reign and the second of his brother's
captivity. His successor, Affonso V., was a child of six years old, and quarrels and disputes
between the Queen Mother and the Infante Dom Pedro rendered the chance of redeeming the captivity
of Fernando less and less.

The King of Castille, and even the Moorish King of Granada, shocked at his sufferings and touched
by his constancy, proposed to unite their forces against Tangier for his deliverance; but the
effect of this was that Zala ben Zala made him over to Muley Xeques, the King of Fez, by whom
he was thrown into a dungeon without light or air. After a time, he was brought back to daylight,
but only to toil among the other Christian slaves, to whom he was a model of patience, resignation,
and kindness. Even his enemies became struck with admiration of his high qualities, and the
King of Fez declared that he even deserved to be a Mahometan!

At last, in 1443, Fernando's captivity ended, but only by his death. Muley Xeque caused a tall
tower to be erected on his tomb, in memory of the victory of Tangier; but in 1473, two sons
of Muley being made prisoners by the Portuguese, one was ransomed for the body of Dom Fernando,
who was then solemnly laid in the vaults of the beautiful Abbey of Batalha on the field of
Aljubarota, which had given his father the throne. Universal honor attended the name of the
Constant Prince, the Portuguese Regulus; and seldom as the Spanish admire anything Portuguese,
a fine drama of the poet Calderon is founded upon that noble spirit which preferred dreary
captivity to the yielding up his father's conquest to the enemies of his country and religion.
Nor was this constancy thrown away; Ceuta remained a Christian city. It was held by Portugal
till the house of Aviz was extinguished in Dom Sebastiao, and since that time has belonged
to the crown of Spain.

THE CARNIVAL OF PERTH

1435

It was bedtime, and the old vaulted chambers of the Dominican monastery at Perth echoed with
sounds that would seem incongruous in such a home of austerity, but that the disturbed state
of Scotland rendered it the habit of her kings to attach their palaces to convents, that they
themselves might benefit by the 'peace of the Church', which was in general accorded to all
sacred spots.

Thus it was that Christmas and Carnival time of 1435-6 had been spent by the Court in the cloisters
of Perth, and the dance, the song, and the tourney had strangely contrasted with the grave
and self-denying habits to which the Dominicans were devoted in their neighboring cells. The
festive season was nearly at an end, for it was the 20th of February; but the evening had been
more than usually gay, and had been spent in games at chess, tables, or backgammon, reading
romances of chivalry, harping, and singing. King James himself, brave and handsome, and in
the prime of life, was the blithest of the whole joyous party. He was the most accomplished
man in his dominions; for though he had been basely kept a prisoner at Windsor throughout his
boyhood by Henry IV of England, an education had been bestowed on him far above what he would
have otherwise obtained; and he was naturally a man of great ability, refinement, and strength
of character. Not only was he a perfect knight on horseback, but in wrestling and running,
throwing the hammer, and 'putting the stane', he had scarcely a rival, and he was skilled in
all the learned lore of the time, wrote poetry, composed music both sacred and profane, and
was a complete minstrel, able to sing beautifully and to play on the harp and organ. His Queen,
the beautiful Joan Beaufort, had been the lady of his minstrelsy in the days of his captivity,
ever since he had watched her walking on the slopes of Windsor Park, and wooed her in verses
that are still preserved. They had now been eleven years married, and their Court was one bright
spot of civilization, refinement, and grace, amid the savagery of Scotland. And now, after
the pleasant social evening, the Queen, with her long fair hair unbound, was sitting under
the hands of her tire-women, who were preparing her for the nights rest; and the King, in his
furred nightgown, was standing before the bright fire on the hearth of the wide chimney, laughing
and talking with the attendant ladies.

Yet dark hints had already been whispered, which might have cast a shadow over that careless
mirth. Always fierce and vindictive, the Scots had been growing more and more lawless and savage
ever since the disputed succession of Bruce and Balliol had unsettled all royal authority,
and led to one perpetual war with the English. The twenty years of James's captivity had been
the worst of all--almost every noble was a robber chief; Scottish Borderer preyed upon English
Borderer, Highlander upon Lowlander, knight upon traveler, everyone who had armor upon him
who had not; each clan was at deadly feud with its neighbour; blood was shed like water from
end to end of the miserable land, and the higher the birth of the offender the greater the
impunity he claimed.

Indeed, James himself had been brought next to the throne by one of the most savage and horrible
murders ever perpetrated--that of his elder brother, David, by his own uncle; and he himself
had probably been only saved from sharing the like fate by being sent out of the kingdom. His
earnest words on his return to take the rule of this unhappy realm were these: 'Let God but
grant me life, and there shall not be a spot in my realm where the key shall not keep the castle,
and the bracken bush the cow, though I should lead the life of a dog to accomplish it.'

This great purpose had been before James through the eleven years of his reign, and he had
worked it out resolutely. The lawless nobles would not brook his ruling hand, and strong and
bitter was the hatred that had arisen against him. In many of his transactions he was far from
blameless: he was sometimes tempted to craft, sometimes to tyranny; but his object was always
a high and kingly one, though he was led by the horrid wickedness of the men he had to deal
with more than once to forget that evil is not to be overcome with evil, but with good. In
the main, it was his high and uncompromising resolution to enforce the laws upon high and low
alike that led to the nobles' conspiracies against him; though, if he had always been true
to his purpose of swerving neither to the right nor to the left, he might have avoided the
last fatal offence that armed the murderer against his life.

The chief misdoers in the long period of anarchy had been his uncles and cousins; nor was it
till after his eldest uncle's death that his return home had been possible. With a strong hand
had he avenged upon the princes and their followers the many miseries they had inflicted upon
his people; and in carrying out these measures he had seized upon the great earldom of Strathern,
which had descended to one of their party in right of his wife, declaring that it could not
be inherited by a female. In this he appears to have acted unjustly, from the strong desire
to avail himself by any pretext of an opportunity of breaking the overweening power of the
great turbulent nobles; and, to make up for the loss, he created the new earldom of Menteith,
for the young Malise Graham, the son of the dispossessed earl. But the proud and vindictive
Grahams were not thus to be pacified. Sir Robert Graham, the uncle of the young earl, drew
off into the Highlands, and there formed a conspiracy among other discontented men who hated
the resolute government that repressed their violence. Men of princely blood joined in the
plot, and 300 Highland catherans were ready to accompany the expedition that promised the delights
of war and plunder.

Even when the hard-worked King was setting forth to enjoy his holiday at Perth, the traitors
had fixed upon that spot as the place of his doom; but the scheme was known to so many, that
it could not be kept entirely secret, and warnings began to gather round the King. When, on
his way to Perth, he was about to cross the Firth of Forth, the wild figure of a Highland woman
appeared at his bridle rein, and solemnly warned him 'that, if he crossed that water, he would
never return alive'. He was struck by the apparition, and bade one of his knights to enquire
of her what she meant; but the knight must have been a dullard or a traitor, for he told the
King that the woman was either mad or drunk, and no notice was taken of her warning.

There was likewise a saying abroad in Scotland, that the new year, 1436, should see the death
of a king; and this same carnival night, James, while playing at chess with a young friend,
whom he was wont to call the king of love, laughingly observed that 'it must be you or I, since
there are but two kings in Scotland--therefore, look well to yourself'.

Little did the blithe monarch guess that at that moment one of the conspirators, touched by
a moment's misgiving, was hovering round, seeking in vain for an opportunity of giving him
warning; that even then his chamberlain and kinsman, Sir Robert Stewart, was enabling the traitors
to place boards across the moat for their passage, and to remove the bolts and bars of all
the doors in their way. And the Highland woman was at the door, earnestly entreating to see
the King, if but for one moment! The message was even brought to him, but, alas! he bade her
wait till the morrow, and she turned away, declaring that she should never more see his face!

And now, as before said, the feast was over, and the King stood, gaily chatting with his wife
and her ladies, when the clang of arms was heard, and the glare of torches in the court below
flashed on the windows. The ladies flew to secure the doors. Alas! the bolts and bars were
gone! Too late the warnings returned upon the King's mind, and he knew it was he alone who
was sought. He tried to escape by the windows, but here the bars were but too firm. Then he
seized the tongs, and tore up a board in the floor, by which he let himself down into the vault
below, just as the murderers came rushing along the passage, slaying on their way a page named
Walter Straiton. 

As poetry is more natural to the young mind than philosophy, so is the end of pastoral poetry
more easily achieved than that of the lyric. The difference resides essentially in Ogilvie’s
notion that the pastoral poet contemplates “external objects,” while the lyric poet regards
that which is not immediately available to the senses and consequently requires a more exuberant
invention. What follows upon these reflections is a rather ingenious form of historical progressivism
in which the civilizing powers of the poet provide the principal justification for lyric poetry.
At work in Ogilvie’s thought is a conception of the mythopoeic function of the earliest poets
whose names have come down to us. Such poets, however, did not create their mythos, but imbibed
it from the earlier Egyptian civilization and formed disguised allegorical poems. Here the instructive
function of the first poets is related to the enlarging of the reader’s imagination, so that
Ogilvie’s rather shrewd defense of lyric poetry is based upon the civilizing effects of imaginative
appeal.

The infancy of poetry is related to the infancy of civilization, and the analogical possibilities
of the one to the other sustain his argument at every point.

If his historicism is dubious, his discourse is neatly illustrative of a neoclassic critical
method and of the kind of psychological assumptions upon which such arguments could proceed.
From the rather copious use of allegory and metaphor, as civilizing instruments, Ogilvie traces
the rise of the religious fable as part of the inevitable sequence of imaginative development.
To account, therefore, for the irregularity of the ode, for the “enthusiasm,
obscurity and exuberance” (p. xxiv) which continue to characterize
it, he refers to its anciently established character, a character
not susceptible to amelioration by speculative rules.

He allows, however, that both the “Epopee” (or epic) and the drama were gradually improved,
and the informing principle of his historical progressivism is again patent.

The modifications of the ode are from the fictitious theology of Orpheus
and Museus to the elegance and grace of Anacreon, Horace, and Sappho.

It is mainly Horace whom Ogilvie has in view as the exemplar of the lyric poet, though “a professed
imitator both of Anacreon and Pindar” (p. xxx). We can distinguish, therefore, several different
criteria which contribute to Ogilvie’s criticism: (1) a unity of sentiment consistent with a variety
of emotions; (2) a propriety of the passions in which vivacity is controlled by the circumstances
of character; (3) a just relation between language and sentiment; (4) elegant and pointed expression
(“sallies and picturesque epithets” [p. xxxi.]) both to heighten the passions expressed and
to draw from them their less obvious effects. Such distinctions define Ogilvie’s typical insistence
upon copying Nature, by which he means that the lyric poet’s task is not only to follow the
workings of the mind, but to heighten passion in a way that is more consistent with the nature
of the passion itself than with its action in any particular mind. His criticism looks to the
representation of “the internal movements of the mind warmed by imagination,” yet “exposed in
the happiest and most agreeable attitudes” (p. xxxv). The relation between the empirical and
the ideal is a crux common to Ogilvie and neoclassic theory, not entirely resolved here by
the practical and referential method of citing Horace’s shorter odes. But it is a subject which
comes in for more extended treatment in his second letter, in my judgment a far more critically
ambitious letter and one in which his very fair critical abilities are more conspicuously apparent.

The
second letter undertakes to explain the rules of lyric poetry, even
as the first was concerned with the defects and causes of the poetry.

Ogilvie rehearses a characteristic later eighteenth-century view of the imagination and makes
again the conventional distinctions between faculties appropriate to philosophy and to poetry.
His discussion of the function of judgment is, if anything, more conventional within the boundaries
of neoclassic criticism than is his view of the imagination.
 In a private audience then he
kissed her hand, and those of the King and his saintly sister, Elizabeth, while the Queen gratefully
expressed her thanks, and the King stood by, with tears in his eyes, but withheld by his awkward
bashfulness from expressing the feelings that overpowered him.

Madame Auguier, and her sister, Madame Campan, continued with their royal lady until the next
stage in that miserable downfall of all that was high and noble in unhappy France. She lived
through the horrors of the Revolution, and her daughter became the wife of Marshal Ney.

Well it is that the darkening firmament does but show the stars, and that when treason and
murder surge round the fated chambers of royalty, their foulness and violence do but enhance
the loyal self-sacrifice of such doorkeepers as Catherine Douglas, Madame Auguier, or M. de
Miomandre.

'Such deeds can woman's spirit do, O Catherine Douglas, brave and true! Let Scotland keep thy
holy name Still first upon her ranks of fame.'

THE CROWN OF ST. STEPHEN

1440

Of all the possessions of the old kingdom of Hungary, none was more valued than what was called
the Crown of St. Stephen, so called from one, which had, in the year 1000, been presented by
Pope Sylvester II. to Stephen, the second Christian Duke, and first King of Hungary. A crown
and a cross were given to him for his coronation, which took place in the Church of the Holy
Virgin, at Alba Regale, also called in German Weissenburg, where thenceforth the Kings of Hungary
were anointed to begin their troubled reigns, and at the close of them were laid to rest beneath
the pavement, where most of them might have used the same epitaph as the old Italian leader:
'He rests here, who never rested before'. For it was a wild realm, bordered on all sides by
foes, with Poland, Bohemia, and Austria, ever casting greedy eyes upon it, and afterwards with
the Turk upon the southern border, while the Magyars, or Hungarian nobles, themselves were
a fierce and untameable race, bold and generous, but brooking little control, claiming a voice
in choosing their own Sovereign, and to resist him, even by force of arms, if he broke the
laws. No prince had a right to their allegiance unless he had been crowned with St. Stephen's
Crown; but if he had once worn that sacred circle, he thenceforth was held as the only lawful
monarch, unless he should flagrantly violate the Constitution. In 1076, another crown had been
given by the Greek Emperor to Geysa, King of Hungary, and the sacred crown combined the two.
It had the two arches of the Roman crown, and the gold circlet of the Constantinopolitan; and
the difference of workmanship was evident.

In the year 1439 died King Albert, who had been appointed King of Hungary in right of his wife,
Queen Elizabeth. He left a little daughter only four years old, and as the Magyars had never
been governed by a female hand, they proposed to send and offer their crown, and the hand of
their young widowed Queen, to Wladislas, the King of Poland. But Elizabeth had hopes of another
child, and in case it should be a son, she had no mind to give away its rights to its father's
throne. How, then, was she to help herself among the proud and determined nobles of her Court?
One thing was certain, that if once the Polish king were crowned with St. Stephen's crown,
it would be his own fault if he were not King of Hungary as long as he lived; but if the crown
were not to be found, of course he could not receive it, and the fealty of the nobles would
not be pledged to him.

The most trustworthy person she had about her was Helen Kottenner, the lady who had the charge
of her little daughter, Princess Elizabeth, and to her she confided her desire that the crown
might be secured, so as to prevent the Polish party from getting access to it. Helen herself
has written down the history of these strange events, and of her own struggles of mind, at
the risk she ran, and the doubt whether good would come of the intrigue; and there can be no
doubt that, whether the Queen's conduct were praiseworthy or not, Helen dared a great peril
for the sake purely of loyalty and fidelity. 'The Queen's commands', she says, 'sorely troubled
me; for it was a dangerous venture for me and my little children, and I turned it over in my
mind what I should do, for I had no one to take counsel of but God alone; and I thought if
I did it not, and evil arose therefrom, I should be guilty before God and the world. So I consented
to risk my life on this difficult undertaking; but desired to have someone to help me.' This
was permitted; but the first person to whom the Lady of Kottenner confided her intention, a
Croat, lost his color from alarm, looked like one half-dead, and went at once in search of
his horse. The next thing that was heard of him was that he had had a bad fall from his horse,
and had been obliged to return to Croatia, and the Queen remained much alarmed at her plans
being known to one so faint-hearted. However, a more courageous confidant was afterwards found
in a Hungarian gentleman, whose name has become illegible in Helen's old manuscript.

The crown was in the vaults of the strong Castle of Plintenburg, also called Vissegrad, which
stands upon a bend of the Danube, about twelve miles from the twin cities of Buda and Pesth.
It was in a case within a chest, sealed with many seals, and since the King's death, it had
been brought up by the nobles, who closely guarded both it and the Queen, into her apartments,
and there examined and replaced in the chest. The next night, one of the Queen's ladies upset
a wax taper, without being aware of it, and before the fire was discovered, and put out, the
corner of the chest was singed, and a hole burnt in the blue velvet cushion that lay on the
top. Upon this, the lords had caused the chest to be taken down again into the vault, and had
fastened the doors with many locks and with seals. The Castle had further been put into the
charge of Ladislas von Gara, the Queen's cousin, and Ban, or hereditary commander, of the border
troops, and he had given it over to a Burggraf, or seneschal, who had placed his bed in the
chamber where was the door leading to the vaults.

The Queen removed to Komorn, a castle higher up the Danube, in charge of her faithful cousin,
Count Ulric of Eily, taking with her her little daughter Elizabeth, Helen Kottenner, and two
other ladies. This was the first stage on the journey to Presburg, where the nobles had wished
to lodge the Queen, and from thence she sent back Helen to bring the rest of the maids of honor
and her goods to join her at Komorn. It was early spring, and snow was still on the ground,
and the Lady of Kottenner and her faithful nameless assistant travelled in a sledge; but two
Hungarian noblemen went with them, and they had to be most careful in concealing their arrangements.
Helen had with her the Queen's signet, and keys; and her friend had a file in each shoe, and
keys under his black velvet dress.

On arriving in the evening, they found that the Burggraf had fallen ill, and could not sleep
in the chamber leading to the vault, because it belonged to the ladies' chambers, and that
he had therefore put a cloth over the padlock of the door and sealed it. There was a stove
in the room, and the maidens began to pack up their clothes there, an operation that lasted
till eight o'clock; while Helen's friend stood there, talking and jesting with them, trying
all the while to hide the files, and contriving to say to Helen: 'Take care that we have a
light.' So she begged the old housekeeper to give her plenty of wax tapers, as she had many
prayers to say. At last everyone was gone to bed, and there only remained in the room with
Helen, an old woman, whom she had brought with her, who knew no German, and was fast asleep.
Then the accomplice came back through the chapel, which opened into this same hall. He had
on his black velvet gown and felt shoes, and was followed by a servant, who, Helen says, was
bound to him by oath, and had the same Christian name as himself, this being evidently an additional
bond of fidelity. Helen, who had received from the Queen all the keys to this outer room, let
them in, and, after the Burggraf's cloth and seal had been removed, they unlocked the padlock,
and the other two locks of the outer door of the vault, and the two men descended into it.
There were several other doors, whose chains required to be filed through, and their seals
and locks broken, and to the ears of the waiting Helen the noise appeared fatally loud. She
says, 'I devoutly prayed to God and the Holy Virgin, that they would support and help me; yet
I was in greater anxiety for my soul than for my life, and I prayed to God that He would be
merciful to my soul, and rather let me die at once there, than that anything should happen
against his will, or that should bring misfortune on my country and people.'

She fancied she heard a noise of armed men at the chapel door, but finding nothing there, believed--not
in her own nervous agitation, a thing not yet invented--that it was a spirit, and returning
to her prayers, vowed, poor lady, to make a pilgrimage to St. Maria Zell, in Styria, if the
Holy Virgin's intercessions obtained their success, and till the pilgrimage could be made,
'to forego every Saturday night my feather bed!' After another false alarm at a supposed noise
at the maiden's door, she ventured into the vault to see how her companions were getting on,
when she found they had filed away all the locks, except that of the case containing the crown,
and this they were obliged to burn, in spite of their apprehension that the smell and smoke
might be observed. They then shut up the chest, replaced the padlocks and chains with those
they had brought for the purpose, and renewed the seals with the Queen's signet, which bearing
the royal arms, would baffle detection that the seals had been tampered with. They then took
the crown into the chapel, where they found a red velvet cushion, so large that by taking out
some of the stuffing a hiding place was made in which the crown was deposited, and the cushion
sewn up over it.

By this time day was dawning, the maidens were dressing, and it was the hour for setting off
for Komorn. The old woman who had waited on them came to the Lady of Kottenner to have her
wages paid, and be dismissed to Buda. While she was waiting, she began to remark on a strange
thing lying by the stove, which, to the Lady Helen's great dismay, she perceived to be a bit
of the case in which the crown was kept. She tried to prevent the old woman from noticing it,
pushed it into the hottest part of the stove, and, by way of further precaution, took the old
woman away with her, on the plea of asking the Queen to make her a bedeswoman at Vienna, and
this was granted to her.

When all was ready, the gentleman desired his servant to take the cushion and put it into the
sledge designed for himself and the Lady of Kottenner. The man took it on his shoulders, hiding
it under an old ox- hide, with the tail hanging down, to the laughter of all beholders. Helen
further records the trying to get some breakfast in the marketplace and finding nothing but
herrings, also the going to mass, and the care she took not to sit upon the holy crown, though
she had to sit on its cushion in the sledge. They dined at an inn, but took care to keep the
cushion in sight, and then in the dusk crossed the Danube on the ice, which was becoming very
thin, and halfway across it broke under the maidens' carriage, so that Helen expected to be
lost in the Danube, crown and all. However, though many packages were lost under the ice, her
sledge got safe over, as well as all the ladies, some of whom she took into her conveyance,
and all safely arrived at the castle of Komorn late in the evening.

The very hour of their arrival a babe was born to the Queen, and to her exceeding joy it was
a son. Count von Eily, hearing 'that a king and friend was born to him', had bonfires lighted,
and a torchlight procession on the ice that same night, and early in the morning came the Archbishop
of Gran to christen the child. The Queen wished her faithful Helen to be godmother, but she
refused in favor of some lady whose family it was probably needful to propitiate. She took
off the little princess Elizabeth's mourning for her father and dressed her in red and gold,
all the maidens appeared in gay apparel, and there was great rejoicing and thanksgiving when
the babe was christened Ladislas, after a sainted King of Hungary.

The peril was, however, far from ended; for many of the Magyars had no notion of accepting
an infant for their king, and by Easter, the King of Poland was advancing upon Buda, to claim
the realm to which he had been invited. No one had discovered the abstraction of the crown,
and Elizabeth's object was to take her child to Weissenburg, and there have him crowned, so
as to disconcert the Polish party. She had sent to Buda for cloth of gold to make him a coronation
dress, but it did not come in time, and Helen therefore shut herself into the chapel at Komorn,
and, with doors fast bolted, cut up a rich and beautiful vestment of his grandfather's, the
emperor Sigismund, of red and gold, with silver spots, and made it into a tiny coronation robe,
with surplice and humeral (or shoulder-piece), the stole and banner, the gloves and shoes.
The Queen was much alarmed by a report that the Polish party meant to stop her on her way to
Weissenburg; and if the baggage should be seized and searched, the discovery of the crown might
have fatal consequences. Helen, on this, observed that the King was more important than the
crown, and that the best way would be to keep them together; so she wrapped up the crown in
a cloth, and hid it under the mattress of his cradle, with a long spoon for mixing his pap
upon the top, so, said the Queen, he might take care of his crown himself.

On Tuesday before Whit Sunday the party set out, escorted by Count Ulric, and several other
knights and nobles. After crossing the Danube in a large boat, the Queen and her little girl
were placed in a carriage, or more probably a litter, the other ladies rode, and the cradle
and its precious contents were carried by four men; but this the poor little Lassla, as Helen
shortens his lengthy name, resented so much, that he began to scream so loud that she was forced
to dismount and carry him in her arms, along a road rendered swampy by much rain.

They found all the villages deserted by the peasants, who had fled into the woods, and as most
of their lords were of the other party, they expected an attack, so the little king was put
into the carriage with his mother and sister, and the ladies formed a circle round it 'that
if anyone shot at the carriage we might receive the stroke'. When the danger was over the child
was taken out again, for he would be content nowhere but in the arms of either his nurse or
of faithful Helen, who took turns to carry him on foot nearly all the way, sometimes in a high
wind which covered them with dust, sometimes in great heat, sometimes in rain so heavy that
Helen's fur pelisse, with which she covered his cradle, had to be wrung out several times.
They slept at an inn, round which the gentlemen lighted a circle of fires, and kept watch all
night. 

I considered George Washington, and what action he would have taken under similar circumstances.
Then I knew there was just one thing to make me feel right inside, and that was--Restitution.

So
I said to myself: "I will do that. I will take that green watermelon back where I got it from."
And the minute I had said it I felt that great moral uplift that comes to you when you've
made a noble resolution.

So I gathered up the biggest fragments, and I carried them back to
the farmer's wagon, and I restored the watermelon--what was left of
it.

And I made him give me a good one in place of it, too.

And I told him he ought to be ashamed of himself going around working off his worthless, old,
green watermelons on trusting purchasers who had to rely on him. How could they tell from
the outside whither the melons were good or not? That was his business. And if he didn't reform,
I told him I'd see that he didn't get any more of my trade--nor anybody,
else's I knew, if I could help it.

You know that man was as contrite as a revivalist's last convert. He said he was all broken up
to think I'd gotten a green watermelon. He promised the he would never carry another green
watermelon if he starved for it. And he drove off--a better man.

Now, do you see what I did for that man? He was on a downward path, and I rescued him. But all I
got out of it was a watermelon.

Yet I'd rather have that memory--just
that memory of the good I did for that depraved farmer--than all the
material gain you can think of. Look at the lesson he got! I never
got anything like that from it. But I ought to be satisfied: I was
only eleven years old, but I secured everlasting benefit to other
people.

The moral in this is perfectly clear, and I think there's
one in they next memory I'm going to tell you about.

And thus Ladislas became King of Hungary at twelve weeks old, and was then carried off by his
mother into Austria for safety. Whether this secret robbery of the crown, and coronation by
stealth, was wise or just on the mother's part is a question not easy of answer--though of
course she deemed it her duty to do her utmost for her child's rights. Of Helen Kottenner's
deep fidelity and conscientious feeling there can be no doubt, and her having acted with her
eyes fully open to the risk she ran, her trust in Heaven overcoming her fears and terrors,
rendered her truly a heroine.

The crown has had many other adventures, and afterwards was kept in an apartment of its own,
in the castle of Ofen, with an antechamber guarded by two grenadiers. The door was of iron,
with three locks, and the crown itself was contained in an iron chest with five seals. All
this, however, did not prevent it from being taken away and lost in the Revolution of 1849.

GEORGE THE TRILLER

1455

                I.

'Why, Lady dear, so sad of cheer?
  Hast waked the livelong night?'
'My dreams foreshow my children's woe,
  Ernst bold and Albrecht bright.

'From the dark glades of forest shades
  There rushed a raging boar,
Two sapling oaks with cruel strokes
  His crooked tusks uptore.'

'Ah, Lady dear, dismiss thy fear
  Of phantoms haunting sleep!'
'The giant knight, Sir Konrad hight,
  Hath vowed a vengeance deep.

'My Lord, o'erbold, hath kept his gold,
  And scornful answer spake:
'Kunz, wisdom learn, nor strive to burn
  The fish within their lake.'

'See, o'er the plain, with all his train,
  My Lord to Leipzig riding;
Some danger near my children dear
  My dream is sure betiding.'

'The warder waits before the gates,
  The castle rock is steep,
The massive walls protect the halls,
  Thy children safely sleep.'

                II.

'T is night's full noon, fair shines the moon
  On Altenburg's old halls,
The silver beams in tranquil streams
  Rest on the ivied walls.

Within their tower the midnight hour
  Has wrapt the babes in sleep,
With unclosed eyes their mother lies
  To listen and to weep.

What sudden sound is stirring round?
  What clang thrills on her ear?
Is it the breeze amid the trees
  Re-echoing her fear?

Swift from her bed, in sudden dread,
  She to her lattice flies:
Oh! sight of woe, from far below
  Behold a ladder rise:

And from yon tower, her children's bower,
  Lo! Giant Kunz descending!
Ernst, in his clasp of iron grasp,
  His cries with hers is blending.

'Oh! hear my prayer, my children spare,
  The sum shall be restored;
Nay, twenty-fold returned the gold,
  Thou know'st how true my Lord.'

With mocking grace he bowed his face:
  'Lady, my greetings take;
Thy Lord may learn how I can burn
  The fish within their lake.'

Oh! double fright, a second knight
  Upon the ladder frail,
And in his arm, with wild alarm,
  A child uplifts his wail!

Would she had wings! She wildly springs
  To rouse her slumbering train;
Bolted without, her door so stout
  Resists her efforts vain!

No mortal ear her calls can hear,
  The robbers laugh below;
Her God alone may hear her moan,
  Or mark her hour of woe.

A cry below, 'Oh! let me go,
  I am no prince's brother;
Their playmate I--Oh! hear my cry
  Restore me to my mother!'

With anguish sore she shakes the door.
  Once more Sir Kunz is rearing
His giant head. His errand sped
  She sees him reappearing.

Her second child in terror wild
  Is struggling in his hold;
Entreaties vain she pours again,
  Still laughs the robber bold.

'I greet thee well, the Elector tell
  How Kunz his counsel takes,
And let him learn that I can burn
  The fish within their lakes.'

                III.

'Swift, swift, good steed, death's on thy speed,
  Gain Isenburg ere morn;
Though far the way, there lodged our prey,
  We laugh the Prince to scorn.

'There Konrad's den and merry men
  Will safely hold the boys--
The Prince shall grieve long ere we leave
  Our hold upon his joys.

'But hark! but hark! how through the dark
  The castle bell is tolling,
From tower and town o'er wood and down,
  The like alarm notes rolling.

'The peal rings out! echoes the shout!
  All Saxony's astir;
Groom, turn aside, swift must we ride
  Through the lone wood of fir.'

Far on before, of men a score
  Prince Ernst bore still sleeping;
Thundering as fast, Kunz came the last,
  Carrying young Albrecht weeping.

The clanging bell with distant swell
  Dies on the morning air,
Bohemia's ground another bound
  Will reach, and safety there.

The morn's fresh beam lights a cool stream,
  Charger and knight are weary,
He draws his rein, the child's sad plain
  He meets with accents cheery.

'Sir Konrad good, be mild of mood,
  A fearsome giant thou!
For love of heaven, one drop be given
  To cool my throbbing brow!'

Kunz' savage heart feels pity's smart,
  He soothes the worn-out child,
Bathes his hot cheeks, and bending seeks
  For woodland berries wild.

A deep-toned bark! A figure dark,
  Smoke grimed and sun embrowned,
Comes through the wood in wondering mood,
  And by his side a hound.

'Oh, to my aid, I am betrayed,
  The Elector's son forlorn,
From out my bed these men of dread
  Have this night hither borne!'

'Peace, if thou 'rt wise,' the false groom cries,
  And aims a murderous blow;
His pole-axe long, his arm so strong,
  Must lay young Albrecht low.

See, turned aside, the weapon glide
  The woodman's pole along,
To Albrecht's clasp his friendly grasp
  Pledges redress from wrong.

Loud the hound's note as at the throat
  Of the false groom he flies;
Back at the sounds Sir Konrad bounds:
  'Off hands, base churl,' he cries.

The robber lord with mighty sword,
  Mailed limbs of giant strength--
The woodman stout, all arms without,
  Save his pole's timber length--

Unequal fight! Yet for the right
  The woodman holds the field;
Now left, now right, repels the knight,
  His pole full stoutly wields.

His whistle clear rings full of cheer,
  And lo! his comrades true,
All swarth and lusty, with fire poles trusty,
  Burst on Sir Konrad's view.

His horse's rein he grasps amain
  Into his selle to spring,
His gold-spurred heel his stirrup's steel
  Has caught, his weapons ring.

His frightened steed with wildest speed
  Careers with many a bound;
Sir Konrad's heel fast holds the steel,
  His head is on the ground.

The peasants round lift from the ground
  His form in woeful plight,
To convent cell, for keeping well,
  Bear back the robber knight.

'Our dear young lord, what may afford
  A charcoal-burners' store
We freely spread, milk, honey, bread,
  Our heated kiln before!'

                IV.

Three mournful days the mother prays,
  And weeps the children's fate;
The prince in vain has scoured the plain--
  A sound is at the gate.

The mother hears, her head she rears,
  She lifts her eager finger--
'Rejoice, rejoice, 't is Albrecht's voice,
  Open! Oh, wherefore linger?'

See, cap in hand the woodman stand--
  Mother, no more of weeping--
His hound well tried is at his side,
  Before him Albrecht leaping,

Cries, 'Father dear, my friend is here!
  My mother! Oh, my mother!
The giant knight he put to flight,
  The good dog tore the other.'

Oh! who the joy that greets the boy,
  Or who the thanks may tell,
Oh how they hail the woodman's tale,
  How he had 'trilled him well!'

[Footnote: Trillen, to shake; a word analogous to our rill, to shake the voice in singing]

'I trilled him well,' he still will tell
  In homely phrase his story,
To those who sought to know how wrought
  An unarmed hand such glory.

That mother sad again is glad,
  Her home no more bereft;
For news is brought Ernst may be sought
  Within the Devil's Cleft.

That cave within, these men of sin
  Had learnt their leader's fall,
The prince to sell they proffered well
  At price of grace to all.

Another day and Earnest lay,
  Safe on his mother's breast;
Thus to her sorrow a gladsome morrow
  Had brought her joy and rest.

The giant knight was judged aright,
  Sentenced to death he lay;
The elector mild, since safe his child,
  Sent forth the doom to stay.

But all to late, and o'er the gate
  Of Freiburg's council hall
Sir Konrad's head, with features dread,
  The traitor's eyes appal.

The scullion Hans who wrought their plans,
  And oped the window grate,
Whose faith was sold for Konrad's gold,
  He met a traitor's fate

                V.

Behold how gay the wood to-day,
  The little church how fair,
What banners wave, what tap'stry brave
  Covers its carvings rare!

A goodly train--the parents twain,
  And here the princess two,
Here with his pole, George, stout of soul,
  And all his comrades true.

High swells the chant, all jubilant,
  And each boy bending low,
Humbly lays down the wrapping gown
  He wore the night of woe.

Beside them lay a smock of grey,
  All grimed with blood and smoke;
A thankful sign to Heaven benign,
  That spared the sapling oak.

'What prize would'st hold, thou 'Triller bold',
  Who trilled well for my son?'
'Leave to cut wood, my Lord, so good,
  Near where the fight was won.'

'Nay, Triller mine, the land be thine,
  My trusty giant-killer,
A farm and house I and my spouse
  Grant free to George the Triller!'

Years hundred four, and half a score,
  Those robes have held their place;
The Triller's deed has grateful meed
  From Albrecht's royal race.

The child rescued by George the Triller's Golden Deed was the ancestor of the late Prince Consort,
and thus of our future line of kings. He was the son of the Elector Friedrich the mild of Saxony,
and of Margarethe of Austria, whose dream presaged her children's danger. The Elector had incurred
the vengeance of the robber baron, Sir Konrad of Kauffingen, who, from his huge stature, was
known as the Giant Ritter, by refusing to make up to him the sum of 4000 gulden which he had
had to pay for his ransom after being made prisoner in the Elector's service. In reply to his
threats, all the answer that the robber knight received was the proverbial one, 'Do not try
to burn the fish in the ponds, Kunz.'

Stung by the irony, Kunz bribed the elector's scullion, by name Hans Schwabe, to admit him
and nine chosen comrades into the Castle of Altenburg on the night of the 7th of July, 1455,
when the Elector was to be at Leipzig. Strange to say, this scullion was able to write, for
a letter is extant from him to Sir Konrad, engaging to open the window immediately above the
steep precipice, which on that side was deemed a sufficient protection to the castle, and to
fasten a rope ladder by which to ascend the crags. This window can still be traced, though
thenceforth it was bricked up. It gave access to the children's apartments, and on his way
to them, the robber drew the bolt of their mother's door, so that though, awakened by the noise,
she rushed to her window, she was a captive in her own apartment, and could not give the alarm,
nor do anything but join her vain entreaties to the cries of her helpless children. It was
the little son of the Count von Bardi whom Wilhelm von Mosen brought down by mistake for young
Albrecht, and Kunz, while hurrying up to exchange the children, bade the rest of his band hasten
on to secure the elder prince without waiting for him. He followed in a few seconds with Albrecht
in his arms, and his servant Schweinitz riding after him, but he never overtook the main body.
Their object was to reach Konrad's own Castle of Isenburg on the frontiers of Bohemia, but
they quickly heard the alarm bells ringing, and beheld beacons lighted upon every hill. They
were forced to betake themselves to the forests, and about half-way, Prince Ernst's captors,
not daring to go any father, hid themselves and him in a cavern called the Devil's Cleft on
the right bank of the River Mulde.

Kunz himself rode on till the sun had risen, and he was within so few miles of his castle that
the terror of his name was likely to be a sufficient protection. Himself and his horse were,
however, spent by the wild midnight ride, and on the border of the wood of Eterlein, near the
monastery of Grunheim, he halted, and finding the poor child grievously exhausted and feverish,
he lifted him down, gave him water, and went himself in search of wood strawberries for his
refreshment, leaving the two horses in the charge of Schweinitz. The servant dozed in his saddle,
and meanwhile the charcoal-burner, George Schmidt, attracted by the sounds, came out of the
wood, where all night he had been attending to the kiln, hollowed in the earth, and heaped
with earth and roots of trees, where a continual charring of wood was going on. Little Albrecht
no sooner saw this man than he sprang to him, and telling his name and rank, entreated to be
rescued from these cruel men. The servant awaking, leapt down and struck a deadly blow at the
boy's head with his pole-ax, but it was parried by the charcoal-burner, who interposing with
one hand the strong wooden pole he used for stirring his kiln, dragged the little prince aside
with the other, and at the same time set his great dog upon the servant. Sir Konrad at once
hurried back, but the valiant charcoal- burner still held his ground, dangerous as the fight
was between the peasant unarmed except for the long pole, and the fully accoutered knight of
gigantic size and strength. However, a whistle from George soon brought a gang of his comrades
to his aid, and Kunz, finding himself surrounded, tried to leap into his saddle, and break
through the throng by weight of man and horse, but his spur became entangled, the horse ran
away, and he was dragged along with his head on the ground till he was taken up by the peasants
and carried to the convent of Grunheim, whence he was sent to Zwickau, and was thence transported
heavily ironed to Freiburg, where he was beheaded on the 14th of July, only a week after his
act of violence. The Elector, in his joy at the recovery of even one child, was generous enough
to send a pardon, but the messenger reached Freiburg too late, and a stone in the marketplace
still marks the place of doom, while the grim effigy of Sir Konrad's head grins over the door
of the Rathhaus. It was a pity Friedrich's mildness did not extend to sparing torture as well
as death to his treacherous scullion, but perhaps a servant's power of injuring his master
was thought a reason for surrounding such instances of betrayal with special horrors.

The party hidden in the Devil's Cleft overheard the peasants in the wood talking of the fall
of the giant of Kauffingen, and, becoming alarmed for themselves, they sent to the Governor
of the neighboring castle of Hartenstein to offer to restore Prince Ernst, provided they were
promised a full pardon. The boy had been given up as dead, and intense were the rejoicings
of the parents at his restoration. The Devil's Cleft changed its name to the Prince's Cleft,
and the tree where Albrecht had lain was called the Prince's Oak, and still remains as a witness
to the story, as do the moth-eaten garments of the princely children, and the smock of the
charcoal-burner, which they offered up in token of thanksgiving at the little forest church
of Ebendorff, near the scene of the rescue.

'I trillirt the knaves right well,' was honest George's way of telling the story of his exploit,
not only a brave one, but amounting even to self-devotion when we remember that the robber
baron was his near neighbour, and a terror to all around. The word Triller took the place of
his surname, and when the sole reward he asked was leave freely to cut wood in the forest,
the Elector gave him a piece of land of his own in the parish of Eversbach. In 1855 there was
a grand celebration of the rescue of the Saxon princes on the 9th of July, the four hundredth
anniversary, with a great procession of foresters and charcoal-burners to the 'Triller's Brewery',
which stands where George's hut and kiln were once placed. Three of his descendants then figured
in the procession, but since that time all have died, and the family of the Trillers is now
extinct.

SIR THOMAS MORE'S DAUGHTER

1535

We have seen how dim and doubtful was the belief that upbore the grave and beautiful Antigone
in her self-sacrifice; but there have been women who have been as brave and devoted in their
care of the mortal remains of their friends--not from the heathen fancy that the weal of the
dead depended on such rites, but from their earnest love, and with a fuller trust beyond.

Such was the spirit of Beatrix, a noble maiden of Rome, who shared the Christian faith of her
two brothers, Simplicius and Faustinus, at the end of the third century. For many years there
had been no persecution, and the Christians were living at peace, worshipping freely, and venturing
even to raise churches. Young people had grown up to whom the being thrown to the lions, beheaded,
or burnt for the faith's sake, was but a story of the times gone by. But under the Emperor
Diocletian all was changed. The old heathen gods must be worshipped, incense must be burnt
to the statue of the Emperor, or torture and death were the punishment. The two brothers Simplicius
and Faustinus were thus asked to deny their faith, and resolutely refused. They were cruelly
tortured, and at length beheaded, and their bodies thrown into the tawny waters of the Tiber.
Their sister Beatrix had taken refuge with a poor devout Christian woman, named Lucina. But
she did not desert her brothers in death; she made her way in secret to the bank of the river,
watching to see whether the stream might bear down the corpses so dear to her. Driven along,
so as to rest upon the bank, she found them at last, and, by the help of Lucina, she laid them
in the grave in the cemetery called Ad Ursum Pileatum. For seven months she remained in her
shelter, but she was at last denounced, and was brought before the tribunal, where she made
answer that nothing should induce her to adore gods made of wood and stone. She was strangled
in her prison, and her corpse being cast out, was taken home by Lucina, and buried beside her
brothers. It was, indeed, a favorite charitable work of the Christian widows at Rome to provide
for the burial of the martyrs; and as for the most part they were poor old obscure women, they
could perform this good work with far less notice than could persons of more mark.

But nearer home, our own country shows a truly Christian Antigone, resembling the Greek lady,
both in her dutifulness to the living, and in her tender care for the dead. This was Margaret,
the favorite daughter of sir Thomas More, the true-hearted, faithful statesman of King Henry VIII.

Margaret's home had been an exceedingly happy one. Her father, Sir Thomas More, was a man of
the utmost worth, and was both earnestly religious and conscientious, and of a sweetness of
manner and playfulness of fancy that endeared him to everyone. He was one of the most affectionate
and dutiful of sons to his aged father, Sir John More; and when the son was Lord Chancellor,
while the father was only a judge, Sir Thomas, on his way to his court, never failed to kneel
down before his father in public, and ask his blessing. Never was the old saying, that a dutiful
child had dutiful children, better exemplified than in the More family. In the times when it
was usual for parents to be very stern with children, and keep them at a great distance, sometimes
making them stand in their presence, and striking them for any slight offence, Sir Thomas More
thought it his duty to be friendly and affectionate with them, to talk to them, and to enter
into their confidence; and he was rewarded with their full love and duty. 

The surviving lands would be so swept by the flood, that scarcely any of the present features
would remain unchanged. All animals and movable things would be engulfed. In a few minutes, this brawling,
chattering, bustling world would be stilled in universal death. What a settlement of 'questions'
there! What a strike of work! What a command of Silence!

A board of bank directors was hesitating about a bill for L.100, some thinking it rather indifferent
paper, others viewing it more favourably; when down comes the cometic flood, and while the manager
rings his bell to see what is the matter, it enters by doors and windows, and in an instant
closes the whole concern. A criminal court was sitting in expectation of the return of the jury
with their verdict. There was one thinking that death may not be far from his door, and a hundred
pitying him in the contrast of their own assurance from the imminent foe, when lo! the flood,
and judges, jury, criminal, and sympathising audience, are all instantly on a level. A sanitary
commission was deliberating on impediments to the bringing in of fresh and the taking away of
foul water, and wondering if there ever would be a body of their denomination which could do
anything it wished to do for the benefit of a mild, expectant, inactive, suffering public. The
comet pours in its fresh water on the instant, and the whole difficulties of the case are
at once resolved.

A synod had been called to consider some nice point, hardly palpable to common understandings,
but which everybody thought a very important point notwithstanding, and three gentlemen speaking
at once to contrary purposes were about to be interrupted by a fourth of a different opinion
still, when enter comet--a real Moderator--and at one stroke decides what poor mankind had been
wrangling about for centuries, and what, to all appearance, but for this 'redding straik,'
they would have wrangled about for centuries to come. Lord Augustus Anser had demanded satisfaction
of the Honourable Mr Pavo for an injurious remark, and they were proceeding by railway to make
a deadly end of it, when, lo! the comet dashes in like an undesired train from a siding, and quashes
one of the prettiest quarrels which has happened for a twelvemonth. There was an unpleasant
dispute with America about a herring-barrel, and barrels of a different kind were likely to be
resorted to to settle it. The Admiralty was all astir as to how many vessels it might be necessary
to set afloat for the business.

Brother Jonathan was calculating what could be made of the crisis in working out the election
of a president. The comet takes upon itself to set the whole naval force of both countries afloat--the
'origo mali' too--and at the same time to countermand the presidential election. So that matter passes.
Another president was on the point of electing himself emperor--a loving pair was about to
be wed--the Court of Chancery was just commencing a career of reform--a new author was starting
into fame with the most brilliant novel of the season--when the comet thwarts every hope. Lloyd's
had never calculated on such an accident. On 'Change, if there had been time for a moment's
remark, it would have been regarded as a most unheard-of thing. The life-assurance companies,
having in their tables made no allowance for such a contingency,
would have been ruined by so many policies 'emerging' (oh, word of
mockery!) at once, had it not been that there were no survivors to
claim the various amounts.

Debts, bonds, contracts, obligations of all kinds, in like manner were absolved by the comet,
and Creation itself left to open a new score in, it is to be hoped, a less blotted book.

Considered as a reform, our possible event must be viewed with great interest. The patriot's heart
is broken, in the ordinary current of things, by the passive resistance he meets with from the
great, inert mass of prejudice and contrary interest. His most generous views are thwarted
by thousands of accidents which there was no foreseeing when he put the affair down on paper.
Tories hate and scandalise him; despots put him in prison; he only can bequeath his scheme to
be wrought out by the happy man of a happier age. Here, however, comes me in a besom which sweeps
all the old peccant institutions away at one whisk. Church and state are severed, and for ever.
The Holy Alliance against the liberties of mankind is broken up--the
pomp and corruption of courts is annihilated--bribery and bigotry
are no more.

What a clean sweep!--how hopeless reaction!

Surely the most extravagant views of the Destructives must be gratified
and contented at last.

If the event shall ever happen, it cannot be doubted that the present
Mankind will leave many interesting memorials of themselves and their
progress for the examination of a new race, should such ever arise. In good faith I rejoice that I have given the
devil a foul fall; because I have with those lords gone so far that without great shame I can
never go back,' he answered, meaning that he had been enabled to hold so firmly to his opinions,
and speak them out so boldly, that henceforth the temptation to dissemble them and please the
King would be much lessened. That he had held his purpose in spite of the weakness of mortal
nature, was true joy to him, though he was so well aware of the consequences that when his
daughter Margaret came to him the next day with the glad tidings that the charge against him
had been given up, he calmly answered her, 'In faith, Meg, what is put off is not given up.'

One day, when he had asked Margaret how the world went with the new Queen, and she replied,
'In faith, father, never better; there is nothing else in the court but dancing and sporting,'
he replied, with sad foresight, 'Never better. So he caused a great knocking to be made while
all were at dinner, and the sham pursuivant went through all the forms of citing him, and the
whole household were in much alarm, till he explained the jest; but the earnest came only a
few days afterwards. On the 13th of April of 1534, arrived the real pursuivant to summon him
to Lambeth, there to take the oath of supremacy, declaring that the King was the head of the
Church of England, and that the Pope had no authority there. He knew what the refusal would
bring on him. He went first to church, and then, not trusting himself to be unmanned by his
love for his children and grandchildren, instead of letting them, as usual, come down to the
water side, with tender kisses and merry farewells, he shut the wicket gate of the garden upon
them all, and only allowed his son-in-law Roper to accompany him, whispering into his ear,
'I thank our Lord, the field is won.'

Conscience had triumphed over affection, and he was thankful, though for the last time he looked
on the trees he had planted, and the happy home he had loved. Before the council, he undertook
to swear to some clauses in the oath which were connected with the safety of the realm; but
he refused to take that part of the oath which related to the King's power over the Church.
It is said that the King would thus have been satisfied, but that the Queen urged him further.
At any rate, after being four days under the charge of the Abbot of Westminister, Sir Thomas
was sent to the Tower of London. There his wife--a plain, dull woman, utterly unable to understand
the point of conscience--came and scolded him for being so foolish as to lie there in a close,
filthy prison, and be shut up with rats and mice, instead of enjoying the favor of the King.
He heard all she had to say, and answered, 'I pray thee, good Mrs. Alice, tell me one thing--is
not this house as near heaven as my own?' To which she had no better answer than 'Tilly vally,
tilly vally.' But, in spite of her folly, she loved him faithfully; and when all his property
was seized, she sold even her clothes to obtain necessaries for him in prison.

His chief comfort was, however, in visits and letters from his daughter Margaret, who was fully
able to enter into the spirit that preferred death to transgression. He was tried in Westminster
Hall, on the 1st of July, and, as he had fully expected, sentenced to death. He was taken back
along the river to the Tower. On the wharf his loving Margaret was waiting for her last look.
She broke through the guard of soldiers with bills and halberds, threw her arms round his neck,
and kissed him, unable to say any word but 'Oh, my father!--oh, my father!' He blessed her,
and told her that whatsoever she might suffer, it was not without the will of God, and she
must therefore be patient. After having once parted with him, she suddenly turned back again,
ran to him, and, clinging round his neck, kissed him over and over again--a sight at which
the guards themselves wept. She never saw him again; but the night before his execution he
wrote to her a letter with a piece of charcoal, with tender remembrances to all the family,
and saying to her, 'I never liked your manner better than when you kissed me last; for I am
most pleased when daughterly love and dear charity have no leisure to look to worldly courtesy.'
He likewise made it his especial request that she might be permitted to be present at his burial.

His hope was sure and steadfast, and his heart so firm that he did not even cease from humorous
sayings. When he mounted the crazy ladder of the scaffold he said, 'Master Lieutenant, I pray
you see me safe up; and for my coming down let me shift for myself.' And he desired the executioner
to give him time to put his beard out of the way of the stroke, 'since that had never offended
his Highness'.

His body was given to his family, and laid in the tomb he had already prepared in Chelsea Church;
but the head was set up on a pole on London Bridge. The calm, sweet features were little changed,
and the loving daughter gathered courage as she looked up at them. How she contrived the deed,
is not known; but before many days had passed, the head was no longer there, and Mrs. Roper
was said to have taken it away. She was sent for to the Council, and accused of the stealing
of her father's head. She shrank not from avowing that thus it had been, and that the head
was in her own possession. One story says that, as she was passing under the bridge in a boat,
she looked up, and said, 'That head has often lain in my lap; I would that it would now fall
into it.' And at that moment it actually fell, and she received it. It is far more likely that
she went by design, at the same time as some faithful friend on the bridge, who detached the
precious head, and dropped it down to her in her boat beneath. Be this as it may, she owned
before the cruel-hearted Council that she had taken away and cherished the head of the man
whom they had slain as a traitor. However, Henry VIII. was not a Creon, and our Christian Antigone
was dismissed unhurt by the Council, and allowed to retain possession of her treasure. She
caused it to be embalmed, kept it with her wherever she went, and when, nine years afterwards,
she died (in the year 1544), it was laid in her coffin in the 'Roper aisle' of St. Dunstan's
Church, at Canterbury.

UNDER IVAN THE TERRIBLE

1564.

Prince Andrej Kourbsky was one of the chief boyards or nobles at the Court of Ivan, the first
Grand Prince of Muscovy who assumed the Eastern title of Tzar, and who relieved Russia from
the terrible invasions of the Tatars. This wild race for nearly four hundred years had roamed
over the country, destroying and plundering all they met with, and blighting all the attempts
at civilization that had begun to be made in the eleventh century. It was only when the Russians
learnt the use of firearms that these savages were in any degree repressed. In the year 1551
the city of Kazan, upon the River Kazanka, a tributary of the Volga, was the last city that
remained in the hands of the Tatars. It was a rich and powerful place, a great centre of trade
between Europe and the East, but it was also a nest of robbers, who had frequently broken faith
with the Russians, and had lately expelled the Khan Schig Alei for having endeavored to fulfill
his engagements to them. The Tzar Ivan Vassilovitch, then only twenty-two years of age, therefore
marched against the place, resolved at any cost to reduce it and free his country from these
inveterate foes.

On his way he received tidings that the Crimean Tatars had come plundering into Russia, probably
thinking to attack Moscow, while Ivan was besieging Kazan. He at once sent off the Prince Kourbsky
with 15,000 men, who met double that number of Tatars at Toula, and totally defeated them,
pursuing them to the River Chevorona, where, after a second defeat, they abandoned a great
number of Russian captives, and a great many camels. Prince Kourbsky was wounded in the head
and shoulder, but was able to continue the campaign.

Some of the boyards murmured at the war, and declared that their strength and resources were
exhausted. Upon this the Tzar desired that two lists might be drawn up of the willing and unwilling
warriors in his camp. 'The first', he said, 'shall be as dear to me as my own children; their
needs shall be made known to me, and I will share all I have with them. The others may stay
at home; I want no cowards in my army.' No one of course chose to be in the second list, and
about this time was formed the famous guard called the Strelitzes, a body of chosen warriors
who were always near the person of the Tzar.

In the middle of August, 1552, Ivan encamped in the meadows on the banks of the Volga, which
spread like a brilliant green carpet around the hill upon which stood the strongly fortified
city of Kazan. The Tatars had no fears. 'This is not the first time', they said, 'that we have
seen the Muscovites beneath our walls. Their fruitless attacks always end in retreats, till
we have learned to laugh them to scorn;' and when Ivan sent them messengers with offers of
peace, they replied, 'All is ready; we only await your coming to begin the feast.'

They did not know of the great change that the last half-century had made in sieges. One of
the Italian condottieri, or leaders of free companies, had made his way to Moscow, and under
his instructions, Ivan's troops were for the first time to conduct a siege in the regular modern
manner, by digging trenches in the earth, and throwing up the soil in front into a bank, behind
which the cannon and gunners are posted, with only small openings made through which to fire
at some spot in the enemy's walls. These trenches are constantly worked nearer and nearer to
the fortifications, till by the effect of the shot an opening or breach must be made in the
walls, and the soldiers can then climb up upon scaling ladders or heaps of small faggots piled
up to the height of the opening. Sometimes, too, the besiegers burrow underground till they
are just below the wall, then fill the hole with gunpowder, and blow up all above them; in
short, instead of, as in former days, a well- fortified city being almost impossible to take,
except by starving out the garrison, a siege is in these times almost equally sure to end in
favor of the besiegers.

All through August and September the Russians made their approaches, while the Tatars resisted
them bravely, but often showing great barbarity. Once when Ivan again sent a herald, accompanied
by a number of Tatar prisoners, to offer terms to Yediguer, the present Khan, the defenders
called out to their countrymen, 'You had better perish by our pure hands than by those of the
wretched Christians,' and shot a whole flight of arrows at them. Moreover, every morning the
magicians used to come out at sunrise upon the walls, and their shrieks, contortions, and waving
of garments were believed, not only by the Tatars but by the Russians, and by Andrej Kourbsky
himself, to bring foul weather, which greatly harassed the Russians. On this Ivan sent to Moscow
for a sacred cross that had been given to the Grand Prince Vladimir when he was converted;
the rivers were blessed, and their water sprinkled round the camp, and the fair weather that
ensued was supposed to be due to the counteraction of the incantations of the magicians. These
Tatars were Mahometans, but they must have retained some of the wind-raising enchantments of
their Buddhist brethren in Asia.

A great mine had been made under the gate of Arsk, and eleven barrels of gunpowder placed in
it. On the 30th of September it was blown up, and the whole tower became a heap of ruins. For
some minutes the consternation of the besieged was such that there was a dead silence like
the stillness of the grave. The Russians rushed forward over the opening, but the Tatars, recovering
at the sight of them, fought desperately, but could not prevent them from taking possession
of the tower at the gateway. Other mines were already prepared, and the Tzar gave notice of
a general assault for the next day, and recommended all his warriors to purify their souls
by repentance, confession, and communion, in readiness for the deadly strife before them. III.
and V., contain appreciations of many authorities which also bear on the field of vol. IV.

GENERAL SECONDARY WORKS

The "Foundation" period, from 1574 to 1652,
is naturally one of the most interesting in the annals of the American
colonies. We will be buried under the walls of Kazan, or else we will make him raise
the siege.'

Early dawn began to break. The sky was clear and cloudless. The Tatars were on their walls,
the Russians in their trenches; the Imperial eagle standard, which Ivan had lately assumed,
floated in the morning wind. The two armies were perfectly silent, save here and there the
bray of a single trumpet, or beat of a naker drum in one or the other, and the continuous hum
of the hymns and chants from the three Russian chapel- tents. The archers held their arrows
on the string, the gunners stood with lighted matches. The copper-clad domes of the minarets
began to glow with the rising sunbeams; the muezzins were on the roofs about to call the Moslemin
to prayer; the deacon in the Tzar's chapel-tent was reading the Gospel. 'There shall be one
fold and one Shepherd.' At that moment the sun's disk appeared above the eastern hills, and
ere yet the red orb had fully mounted above the horizon, there was a burst as it were of tremendous
thunderings, and the ground shook beneath the church. The Tzar went to the entrance, and found
the whole city hill so 'rolled in sable smoke', that he could distinguish nothing, and, going
back to his place, desired that the service should continue. The deacon was in the midst of
the prayer for the establishment of the power of the Tzar and the discomfiture of his enemies,
when the crushing burst of another explosion rushed upon their ears, and as it died away another
voice broke forth, the shout raised by every man in the Russian lines, 'God is with us!' On
then they marched towards the openings that the mines had made, but there the dauntless garrison,
in spite of the terror and destruction caused by the two explosions, met them with unabated
fury, rolling beams or pouring boiling water upon them as they strove to climb the breach,
and fighting hand to hand with them if they mounted it. However, by the time the Tzar had completed
his devotions and mounted his horse, his eagle could be seen above the smoke upon the citadel.

Still the city had to be won, step by step, house by house, street by street; and even while
struggling onwards the Russians were tempted aside by plunder among the rich stores of merchandise
that were heaped up in the warehouses of this the mart of the East. The Khan profited by their
lack of discipline, and forced them back to the walls; nay, they would have absolutely been
driven out at the great gate, but that they beheld their young Tzar on horseback among his
grey-haired councillors. By the advice of these old men Ivan rode forward, and with his own
hand planted the sacred standard at the gates, thus forming a barrier that the fugitives were
ashamed to pass. At the same time he, with half his choice cavalry, dismounted, and entered
the town all fresh and vigorous, their rich armor glittering with gold and silver, and plumes
of various colours streaming from their helmets in all the brilliancy of Eastern taste. This
reinforcement recalled the plunderers to their duty, and the Tatars were driven back to the
Khan's palace, whence, after an hour's defense, they were forced to retreat.

At a postern gate, Andrej Kourbsky and two hundred men met Yediguer and 10,000 Tatars, and
cut off their retreat, enclosing them in the narrow streets. They forced their Khan to take
refuge in a tower, and made signs as if to capitulate. 'Listen,' they said. 'As long as we
had a government, we were willing to die for our prince and country. Now Kazan is yours, we
deliver our Khan to you, alive and unhurt--lead him to the Tzar. For our own part, we are coming
down into the open field to drain our last cup of life with you.'

Yediguer and one old councillor were accordingly placed in the hands of an officer, and then
the desperate Tatars, climbing down the outside of the walls, made for the Kazanka, where no
troops, except the small body under Andrej Kourbsky and his brother Romanus, were at leisure
to pursue them. The fighting was terrible, but the two princes kept them in view until checked
by a marsh which horses could not pass. The bold fugitives took refuge in a forest, where,
other Russian troops coming up, all were surrounded and slain, since not a man of them would
accept quarter.

Yediguer was kindly treated by Ivan, and accompanying him to Moscow, there became a Christian,
and was baptized by the name of Simeon, in the presence of the Tzar and his whole court, on
the banks of the Moskwa. He married a Russian lady, and his whole conduct proved that his conversion
was sincere.

But this story has only been told at so much length to show what manner of man Andrej Kourbsky
was, and Ivan Vassilovitch had been, and how they had once been brethren in arms; and perhaps
it has been lingered over from the melancholy interest there must always be in watching the
fall of a powerful nation, and the last struggles of gallant men. Ivan was then a gallant,
religious and highly gifted prince, generous and merciful, and with every promise of a glorious
reign, full of benefits to his country. Alas! this part of his career was one glimpse of brightness
in the course of a long tempestuous day. His reign had begun when he was but three years old.
He had had a violent and cruel mother, and had, after her death, been bred up by evil-minded
courtiers, who absolutely taught him cruel and dissolute amusements in order to prevent him
from attending to state affairs. For a time, the exhortations of the good and fearless patriarch,
and the influence of his gentle wife Anastasia, had prevailed, and with great vigor and strong
principle he had shaken off all the evil habits of his boyhood, and begun, as it seemed, an
admirable reign.

Too soon, a severe illness shook the balance of his mind, and this was quickly followed by
the death of the excellent Tzarina Anastasia. Whether grief further unsettled him, or whether
the loss of her gentle influence left him a prey to his wicked councillors, from that time
forward his conduct was so wildly savage and barbarous as to win for him the surname of the
Terrible. Frantic actions, extravagant excesses, and freaks of horrible cruelty looked like
insanity; and yet, on the other hand, he often showed himself a clear-headed and sagacious
monarch, anxious for the glory and improvement of his people.

But he lived in continual suspicion, and dreaded every eminent man in his dominions. Kourbsky
whom he had once loved and trusted, and had charged with the command of his army, as his most
able boyard, fell under his suspicion; and, with horror and indignation, learnt that the Tzar
was plotting against his life, and intended to have him put to death. Kourbsky upon this explained
to his wife that she must either see him put to a shameful death, or let him leave her for
ever. He gave his blessing to his son, a boy of nine years old, and leaving his house at night
he scaled the wall of Moscow, and meeting his faithful servant, Vasili Shibanoff, with two
horses, he made his escape. This Vasili was his stirrup-bearer, one of those serfs over whom
the boyard on whose land they were born possessed absolute power. That power was often abused,
but the instinctive faithfulness of the serf towards his master could hardly be shaken, even
by the most savage treatment, and a well- treated serf viewed his master's family with enthusiastic
love and veneration. Vasili accompanied his master's flight through the birch forests towards
the Livonian frontier, the country where but lately Kourbsky had been leading the Tzar's armies.
On the way the prince's horse became exhausted by his weight, and Vasili insisted on giving
up his own in its stead, though capture in the course of such desertion would have been certain
death. However, master and servant safely arrived at Wolmar in Livonia, and there Andrej came
to the determination of renouncing the service of the ungrateful Ivan, and entering that of
the King of Poland. For this last step there was no excuse. Nothing can justify a man in taking
up arms against his country, but in the middle Ages the tie of loyalty was rather to the man
than to the state, and Andrej Kourbsky seems to have deemed that his honor would be safe, provided
he sent a letter to his sovereign, explaining his grievance and giving up his allegiance. The
letter is said to have been full of grave severity and deep, suppressed indignation, though
temperate in tone; but no one would consent to be the bearer of such a missive, since the cruel
tyrant's first fury was almost certain to fall on him who presented it. Believing his master's
honor at stake, Vasili offered himself to be the bearer of the fatal letter, and Kourbsky accepted
the offer, tendering to him a sum of money, which the serf rejected, knowing that money would
soon be of little service to him, and seeking no reward for what he deemed his duty to his lord. 

It made, indeed, no observable change in the movements of the Jovian train, being of too light
a consistence for that; but can we doubt, that it might nevertheless seriously affect the condition
of their surfaces, and especially any animal life existing thereon? This very comet, on the
28th of June 1770, passed the earth at a distance only six times that of the moon. There is
another called Biela's, which revisits the sun every six years, or a little more; and this busy
traveller actually crossed our orbit in 1832, only a month before we passed through the same
point in space!

Another, which made a grand appearance in the western sky in March 1843, would have involved
us in its tail, if we had been only a fortnight earlier at a particular place! Rather fine shaving
that in the celestial economics. Now, if we consider that as many as eight comets have been observed
telescopically in a single year (1846), we must see that the chance of a collision of this
kind is not quite so small as to be unworthy of regard. If it be true that there are thousands
of comets, all of which make periodical visits to the near neighbourhood of the sun, it must be evident
that the earth, being itself not far, comparatively speaking, from that luminary, must be rather
liable as otherwise to a brush from one of these wanderers; and,
indeed, the wonder is, that several thousand years should have passed
without, so far as we know, any one such collision having taken place.

Seeing what a highly-organised system is formed by the physical and organic arrangements upon
our planet, one is apt to think that the scheme of Providence must
have been framed with a provision for the complete exclusion of such
accidents.

To allow of the sudden undoing of all this fair scene, which it has taken thousands of years
to bring out in its full proportions, seems like a wanton destruction of valuable property,
and we are not disposed to believe that such a thing could be permitted. But we must at the same
time remember, that our sense of what is important and consequential has a regard to the earth
alone, which is but a trifling atom in the universe. Who can tell what are the limits which
the Master of worlds has set to mundane calamity?

 He was the
son of a rich boyard, but had devoted himself from his youth to a monastic life, and the fame
of his exertions in behalf of the islanders had led the Tzar to send him not only precious
vessels for the use of his church, but contributions to the stone churches, piers, and hostelries
that he raised for his people; for whom he had made roads, drained marshes, introduced cattle,
and made fisheries and salt pans, changing the whole aspect of the place, and lessening even
the inclemency of the climate.

On this good man the Tzar fixed his choice. He wrote to him to come to Moscow to attend a synod,
and on his arrival made him dine at the palace, and informed him that he was to be chief pastor
of the Russian Church. Feeleep burst into tears, entreating permission to refuse, and beseeching
the Tzar not to trust 'so heavy a freight to such a feeble bark'. Ivan held to his determination,
and Feeleep then begged him at least to dismiss the cruel Oprichnina. 'How can I bless you,'
he said, 'while I see my country in mourning?'

The Tzar replied by mentioning his suspicions of all around him, and commanded Feeleep to be
silent. He expected to be sent back to his convent at once, but, instead of this, the Tzar
commanded the clergy to elect him Archbishop, and they all added their entreaties to him to
accept the office, and endeavor to soften the Tzar, who respected him; and he yielded at last,
saying, 'The will of the Tzar and the pastors of the church must, then, be done.'

At his consecration, he preached a sermon on the power of mildness, and the superiority of
the victories of love over the triumphs of war. It awoke the better feelings of Ivan, and for
months he abstained from any deed of violence; his good days seemed to have returned and he
lived in intimate friendship with the good Archbishop.

But after a time the sleeping lion began to waken. Ivan's suspicious mind took up an idea that
Feeleep had been incited by the nobles to request the abolition of the Oprichnina, and that
they were exciting a revolt. The spies whom he sent into Moscow told him that wherever an Oprichnik
appeared, the people shrank away in silence, as, poor things! they well might. He fancied this
as a sign that conspiracies were brewing, and all his atrocities began again. The tortures
to which whole families were put were most horrible; the Oprichniks went through the streets
with poignards and axes, seeking out their victims, and killing from ten to twenty a day. The
corpses lay in the streets, for no one dared to leave his house to bury them. Feeleep vainly
sent letters and exhortations to the Tzar--they were unnoticed. The unhappy citizens came to
the Archbishop, entreating him to intercede for them, and he gave them his promise that he
would not spare his own blood to save theirs.

One Sunday, as Feeleep was about to celebrate the Holy Communion, Ivan came into the Cathedral
with a troop of his satellites, like him, fantastically dressed in black cassocks and high
caps. He came towards the Metropolitan, but Feeleep kept his eyes fixed on the picture of our
Lord, and never looked at him. Someone said, 'Holy Father, here is the prince; give him your
blessing.'

'No,' said the Archbishop, 'I know not the Tzar in this strange disguise--still less do I know
him in his government. Oh, Prince! we are here offering sacrifice to the Lord, and beneath
the altar the blood of guiltless Christians is flowing in torrents... You are indeed on the
throne, but there is One above all, our Judge and yours. How shall you appear before his Judgment
Seat?--stained with the blood of the righteous, stunned with their shrieks, for the stones
beneath your feet cry out for vengeance to Heaven. Prince, I speak as shepherd of souls; I
fear God alone.'

The Archbishop was within the golden gates, which, in Russian churches, close in the sanctuary
or chancel, and are only entered by the clergy. He was thus out of reach of the cruel iron-tipped
staff, which the Tzar could only strike furiously on the pavement, crying out, 'Rash monk,
I have spared you too long. Henceforth I will be to you such as you describe.'

The murders went on in their full horrors; but, in spite of the threat, the Archbishop remained
unmolested, though broken-hearted at the cruelties around him. At last, however, his resolute
witness became more than the tyrant would endure, and messengers were secretly sent to the
island of Solovsky, to endeavor to find some accusation against him. They tampered with all
the monks in the convent, to induce them to find some fault in him, but each answered that
he was a saint in every thought, word, and deed; until at last Payssi, the prior who had succeeded
him, was induced, by the hope of a bishopric, to bear false witness against him.

He was cited before an assembly of bishops and boyards, presided over by the Tzar, and there
he patiently listened to the monstrous stories told by Payssi. Instead of defending himself,
he simply said, 'This seed will not bring you a good harvest;' and, addressing himself to the
Tzar, said, 'Prince, you are mistaken if you think I fear death. Having attained an advanced
age, far from stormy passions and worldly intrigues, I only desire to return my soul to the
Most High, my Sovereign Master and yours. Better to perish an innocent martyr, than as Metropolitan
to look on at the horrors and impieties of these wretched times. Do what you will with me!
Here are the pastoral staff, the white mitre, and the mantle with which you invested me. And
you, bishops, archimandrites, abbots, servants of the altar, feed the flock of Christ zealously,
as preparing to give an account thereof, and fear the Judge of Heaven more than the earthly judge.'

He was then departing, when the Tzar recalled him, saying that he could not be his own judge,
and that he must await his sentence. In truth, worse indignities were preparing for him. He
was in the midst of the Liturgy on the 8th of November, the Greek Michaelmas, when a boyard
came in with a troop of armed Oprichniks, who overawed the people, while the boyard read a
paper degrading the Metropolitan from his sacred office; and then the ruffians, entering through
the golden gates tore off his mitre and robes, wrapped him in a mean gown, absolutely swept
him out of the church with brooms, and took him in a sledge to the Convent of the Epiphany.
The people ran after him, weeping bitterly, while the venerable old man blessed them with uplifted
hands, and, whenever he could be heard, repeated his last injunction, 'Pray, pray to God.'

Once again he was led before the Emperor, to hear the monstrous sentence that for sorcery,
and other heavy charges, he was to be imprisoned for life. He said no reproachful word, only,
for the last time, he besought the Tzar to have pity on Russia, and to remember how his ancestors
had reigned, and the happy days of his youth. Ivan only commanded the soldiers to take him
away; and he was heavily ironed, and thrown into a dungeon, whence he was afterwards transferred
to a convent on the banks of the Moskwa, where he was kept bare of almost all the necessaries
of life: and in a few days' time the head of Ivan Borissovitch Kolotchof, the chief of his
family, was sent to him, with the message, 'Here are the remains of your dear kinsman, your
sorcery could not save him!' Feeleep calmly took the head in his arms, blessed it, and gave
it back.

The people of Moscow gathered round the convent, gazed at his cell, and told each other stories
of his good works, which they began to magnify into miracles. Thereupon the Emperor sent him
to another convent, at a greater distance. Here he remained till the next year, 1569, when
Maluta Skouratof, a Tatar, noted as a favorite of the Tzar, and one of the chief ministers
of his cruelty, came into his cell, and demanded his blessing for the Tzar.

The Archbishop replied that blessings only await good men and good works, adding tranquilly,
'I know what you are come for. I have long looked for death. Let the Tzar's will be done.'
The assassin then smothered him, but pretended to the abbot that he had been stifled by the
heat of the cell. He was buried in haste behind the altar, but his remains have since been
removed to his own cathedral at Moscow, the scene where he had freely offered his own life
by confronting the tyrant in the vain endeavor to save his people.

Vain, too, was the reproof of the hermit, who shocked Ivan's scruples by offering him a piece
of raw flesh in the middle of Lent, and told him that he was preying on the flesh and blood
of his subjects. "There are places in this neighborhood in which a human being would be as hard
to find as the flag that you and Governor Hamilton have so diligently and unsuccessfully been
in quest of for the past month or two. Really, my son, this is a mysterious little town."

Farnsworth's eyes widened and a flush rose in his swarthy cheeks.

"Damn the flag!" he exclaimed. "Let it lie hidden forever; what do I care? I tell you, Father
Beret, that Alice Roussillon is in extreme danger. Governor Hamilton means to put some terrible
punishment on her. He has a devil's vindictiveness. He showed it
to me clearly awhile ago."

"You showed something of the same sort
to me, once upon a time, my son."

"Yes, I did, Father Beret, and
I got a load of slugs in my shoulder for it from that brave girl's
pistol.

FORT ST. ELMO

1565

The white cross of the Order of St. John waved on the towers of Rhodes for two hundred and
fifty-five years. In 1552, after a desperate resistance, the Turks, under their great Sultan,
Solyman the Magnificent, succeeded in driving the Knights Hospitaliers from their beautiful
home, and they were again cast upon the world.

They were resolved, however, to continue their old work of protecting the Mediterranean travelers,
and thankfully accepted, as a gift from the Emperor Charles V., the little islet of Malta as
their new station. It was a great contrast to their former home, being little more than a mere
rock rising steeply out of the sea, white, glaring and with very shallow earth, unfit to bear
corn, though it produced plenty of oranges, figs, and melons--with little water, and no wood,--the
buildings wretched, and for the most part uninhabited, and the few people a miserable mongrel
set, part Arab, part Greek, part Sicilian, and constantly kept down by the descents of the
Moorish pirates, who used to land in the unprotected bays, and carry off all the wretched beings
they could catch, to sell for slaves. It was a miserable exchange from fertile Rhodes, which
was nearly five times larger than this barren rock; but the Knights only wanted a hospital,
a fortress, and a harbour; and this last they found in the deeply indented northern shore,
while they made the first two. There are numberless extinct volcanoes in both Britain and France;
there are some on the banks of the Rhine; indeed, they are thick-sown everywhere. Now, an extinct
volcano is not quite so safe a neighbour as many may suppose. Vesuvius was an extinct volcano
from time immemorial till the year 63, when it suddenly broke out again, and soon after destroyed
Pompeii and Herculaneum; since which time it has never again subsided into entire inactivity.


Everywhere that there was need was seen the red flag with the eight- pointed cross. If there
was an earthquake on the shores of Italy or Sicily, there were the ships of St. John, bringing
succor to the crushed and ruined townspeople. In every battle with Turk or Moor, the Knights
were among the foremost; and, as ever before, their galleys were the aid of the peaceful merchant,
and the terror of the corsair. Indeed, they were nearer Tunis, Tripoli, and Algiers, the great
nests of these Moorish pirates, and were better able to threaten them, and thwart their cruel
descents, than when so much farther eastward; and the Mahometan power found them quite as obnoxious
in Malta as in Rhodes.

Solyman the Magnificent resolved, in his old age, to sweep these obstinate Christians from
the seas, and, only twelve years after the siege of Rhodes, prepared an enormous armament,
which he united with those of the Barbary pirates, and placed under the command of Mustafa
and Piali, his two bravest pashas, and Dragut, a terrible Algerine corsair, who had already
made an attempt upon the island, but had been repulsed by the good English knight, Sir Nicholas
Upton. Without the advice of this pirate the Sultan desired that nothing should be undertaken.

The Grand Master who had to meet this tremendous danger was Jean Parisot de la Valette, a brave
and resolute man, as noted for his piety and tenderness to the sick in the infirmaries as for
his unflinching courage. When he learnt the intentions of the Sultan, he began by collecting
a Chapter of his Order, and, after laying his tidings before them, said: 'A formidable army
and a cloud of barbarians are about to burst on this isle. Brethren, they are the enemies of
Jesus Christ. The question is the defense of the Faith, and whether the Gospel shall yield
to the Koran. God demands from us the life that we have already devoted to Him by our profession.
Happy they who in so good a cause shall first consummate their sacrifice. Plura enim multo homines
judicant odio, & amore, & cupiditate, &c. quam veritate & præscripto. De Orat. Lib. II. c. 42.]

It
is obvious, that in Lyric Poetry the Author cannot run into this series of methodised allegory, because
the subjects of the Ode are real incidents which would be disfigured
by the continued action of fictitious personages.

His descriptions therefore ought to be concise, diversified, and adapted properly to that
train of sentiment which he is employed to illustrate.


