MYTHS AND LEGENDS
                                   OF
                              OUR OWN LAND

                                   By
                           Charles M. Skinner

                                Vol. 6. It was one of a series of blockhouses built for the protecting of
cleared land while the settlers were coming in, yet it was a trading
station rather than a fort, for the attitude of government toward the red
men was pacific. The French of the Mississippi Valley were not
reconciled, however, to the extension of power by a Saxon people, and the
English in Canada were equally jealous of the prosperity of those
provinces they had so lately lost. Both French and English had emissaries
among the Shawnees when it had become known that the United States
intended to negotiate a treaty with them.

It was the mild weather that comes for a time in October, when Cantantowit blesses the land
from his home in the southwest with rich colors, plaintive perfumes of decay, soft airs, and
tender lights a time for peace; but the garrison at the fort realized that the situation was
precarious. The Shawnees had camped about them, and the air was filled with the neighing of
their ponies and the barking of their dogs. To let them into the fort was to invite massacre;
to keep them out after they had been summoned was to declare war.

Colonel George Rogers Clarke, of Virginia, who was in command, scoffed at the fears of his
men, and would not give ear to their appeals for an adjournment of the meeting or a change
of the place of it. At the appointed hour the doors were opened and the Indians came in. The
pipe of peace was smoked in the usual form, but the red men were sullen and insolent, and seemed
to be seeking a cause of quarrel. Clarke explained that the whites desired only peace, and
he asked the wise men to speak for their tribe. A stalwart chief arose, glanced contemptuously
at the officer and his little guard, and, striding to the table where Clarke was seated, threw
upon it two girdles of wampum--the peace-belt and the war-belt. "We offer you these belts,"
he said. "You know what they mean. Take which you like."

It was a deliberate insult and defiance. Both sides knew it, and many of the men held their
breath. Clarke carelessly picked up the war-belt on the point of his cane and flung it among
the assembled chiefs. Every man in the room sprang to his feet and clutched his weapon. Then,
with a sternness that was almost ferocious, Clarke pointed to the door with an imperative action,
and cried, "Dogs, you may go!"

The Indians were foiled in their ill intent by his self-possession and seeming confidence,
which made them believe that he had forces in the vicinity that they were not prepared to meet.
They had already had a bitter experience of his strength and craft, and in the fear that a
trap had been set for them they fled tumultuously. The treaty was ratified soon after.

THE OBSTINACY OF SAINT CLAIR

When the new First Regiment of United States Infantry paused at Marietta, Ohio, on its way
to garrison Vincennes, its officers made a gay little court there for a time. The young Major
Hamtramck--contemptuously called by the Indians "the frog on horseback," because of his round
shoulders--found especial pleasure in the society of Marianne Navarre, who was a guest at the
house of General Arthur St. Clair; but the old general viewed this predilection with disfavor,
because he had hoped that his own daughter would make a match with the major. But Louisa longed
for the freedom of the woods. She was a horsewoman and a hunter, and she had a sentimental
fondness for Indians.

When Joseph Brandt (Thayendanegea) camped with his dreaded band near the town, it was she who--without
her father's knowledge, and in the disguise of an Indian girl--took the message that had been
entrusted to a soldier asking the tribe to send delegates to a peace council at the fort. Louisa
and Brandt had met in Philadelphia some years before, when both were students in that city,
and he was rejoiced to meet her again, for he had made no secret of his liking for her, and
in view of the bravery she had shown in thus riding into a hostile camp his fondness increased
to admiration. After she had delivered the message she said, "Noble warrior, I have risked
my life to obtain this interview. You must send some one back with me." Brandt replied, "It
is fitting that I alone should guard so courageous a maiden," and he rode with her through
the lines, under the eyes of a wondering and frowning people, straight to the general's door.
Soon after, Brandt made a formal demand for the hand of this dashing maid, but the stubborn
general refused to consider it. He was determined that she ought to love Major Hamtramck, and
he told her so in tones so loud that they reached the ears of Marianne, as she sat reading
in her room. Stung by this disclosure of the general's wishes, and doubting whether the major
had been true to her--fearful, too, that she might be regarded as an interloper--she made a
pretext to return as quickly as possible to her home in Detroit, and left no adieus for her lover.

It was not long after that war broke out between the settlers and the Indians, for Brandt now
had a personal as well as a race grudge to gratify, though when he defeated St. Clair he spared
his life in the hope that the general would reward his generosity by resigning to him his daughter.
At all events, he resolved that the "frog on horseback," whom he conceived to be his rival,
should not win her. The poor major, who cared nothing for Louisa, and who was unable to account
for the flight of Marianne, mourned her absence until it was rumored that she had been married,
when, as much in spite as in love, he took to himself a mate. After he had been for some time
a widower he met Marianne again, and learned that she was still a maiden. He renewed his court
with ardor, but the woman's love for him had died when she learned of his marriage. Affecting
to make light of this second disappointment, he said, "Since I cannot be united to you in life,
I shall be near you in death."

"A soldier cannot choose where he shall die," she answered.

"No matter. I shall sleep in the shadow of your tomb."

As it fell out they were indeed buried near each other in Detroit. Thus, the stupidity and
obstinacy of General St. Clair, in supposing that he could make young folks love to order,
thwarted the happiness of four people and precipitated a war.

THE HUNDREDTH SKULL

In the early part of this century Bill Quick, trapper and frontiersman, lived in a cabin on
the upper Scioto, not far from the present town of Kenton, Ohio. One evening when he returned
from the hunt he found his home rifled of its contents and his aged father weltering in his
blood on the floor. He then and there took oath that he would be revenged a hundredfold. His
mission was undertaken at once, and for many a year thereafter the Indians of the region had
cause to dread the doom that came to them from brake and wood and fen,--now death by knife
that flashed at them from behind a tree, and the next instant whirled through the air and was
buried to the hilt in a red man's heart; now, by bullet as they rowed across the rivers; now,
by axe that clove their skulls as they lay asleep.

Bill Quick worked secretly, and, unlike other men of the place and time, he did not take his
trophies Indian-fashion. The scalp was not enough. He took the head. And presently a row of
grinning skulls was ranged upon his shelves. Ninety-nine of these ghastly prizes occupied his
cabin, and the man was confident that he should accomplish his intent. But the Indians, in
terror, were falling away toward the lakes; they were keeping better guard; and ere the hundredth
man had fallen before his rifle he was seized with fatal illness. Calling to him his son, Tom,
he pointed to the skulls, and charged him to fulfil the oath he had taken by adding to the
list a hundredth skull. Should he fail in this the murdered ancestor and he himself would come
back to haunt the laggard. Tom accepted the trust, but everything seemed to work against him.
He never was much of a hunter nor a very true shot, and he had no liking for war; besides,
the Indians had left the country, as he fancied. So he grumbled at the uncongenial task appointed
for him and kept deferring it from week to week and from year to year. When his conscience
pricked him he allayed the smart with drink, and his conscience seemed to grow more active
as he grew older.

On returning to the cabin after a carouse he declared that he had heard voices, that the skulls
gibbered and cracked their teeth together as if mocking his weakness, and that a phosphorescent
glare shone through the sockets of their eyes. In his cups he prattled his secret, and soon
the whole country knew that he was under oath to kill a red-skin-and the country laughed at
him. On a certain day it was reported that a band of Indians had been seen in the neighborhood,
and what with drink and the taunts of his friends, he was impelled to take his rifle and set
out once more on the war-path. A settler heard a shot fired not long after. Next day a neighbor
passing Tom Quick's cabin tapped at the door, and, receiving no answer, pushed it open and
entered. The hundredth skull was there, on the shelves, a bullet-hole in the forehead, and
the scalp gone. The head was Quick's.

THE CRIME OF BLACK SWAMP

Two miles south of Munger, Ohio, in the heart of what used to be called the Black Swamp, stood
the Woodbury House, a roomy mansion long gone to decay. John Cleves, the last to live in it,
was a man whose evil practices got him into the penitentiary, but people had never associated
him with the queer sights and sounds in the lower chambers, nor with the fact that a man named
Syms, who had gone to that house in 1842, had never been known to leave it. Ten years after
Syms's disappearance it happened that Major Ward and his friend John Stow had occasion to take
shelter there for the night--it being then deserted,--and, starting a blaze in the parlor fireplace,
they lit their pipes and talked till late. Stow would have preferred a happier topic, but the
major, who feared neither man nor devil, constantly turned the talk on the evil reputation
of the house.

While they chatted a door opened with a creak and a human skeleton appeared before them.

"What do you want? Speak!" cried Ward. But waiting for no answer he drew his pistols and fired
two shots at the grisly object. There was a rattling sound, but the skeleton was neither dislocated
nor disconcerted. Advancing deliberately, with upraised arm, it said, in a husky voice, "I,
that am dead, yet live in a sense that mortals do not know. In my earthly life I was James
Syms, who was robbed and killed here in my sleep by John Cleves." With bony finger it pointed
to a rugged gap in its left temple. "Cleves cut off my head and buried it under the hearth.
My body he cast into his well." At these words the head disappeared and the voice was heard
beneath the floor, "Take up my skull." The watchers obeyed the call, and after digging a minute
beneath the hearth a fleshless head with a wound on the left temple came to view. Ward took
it into his hands, but in a twinkling it left them and reappeared on the shoulders of the skeleton.

