A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH of the LIFE AND CHARACTER of JOSEPH  CHARLESS, IN A SERIES OF LETTERS
TO HIS GRANDCHILDREN.  Phil., chap.4, verse 8.

SAINT LOUIS: A. F. COX, PRINTER, OFFICE OF THE MISSOURI PRESBYTERIAN.

1869.

Letter One

MY DEAR GRANDCHILDREN:

We are reminded daily of the uncertainty of human life: for the young and the old, the gay
and the grave, the good and the wicked, are subject to death.  Young people do not realize
this, but it is nevertheless true, and before you are old enough, my children, to understand
and lay to heart all that your mother would tell you of her dearly beloved father, she may
be asleep with grandma, close beside him in Bellefontaine.  An earthly inheritance is highly
esteemed among men. For this reason great efforts are made by them to lay up treasures for
their children.  They know not, however, who shall gather them, for “riches take to themselves
wings and fly away.”  But a good man leaveth an inheritance to his children, and to his children’s
children, which is as stable as the throne of the Most High.  Like the stream that gathers
strength from every rivulet, and grows deeper, and broader, and more majestic, until the myriads
of crystal drops are received into the bosom of the mighty deep, so likewise is the legacy
of a good man.  It descends to his child by birthright, and through the rich mercy of a covenant-keeping
God, widens and extends its life-giving power, flowing on and on, as rivers of water, into
the boundless ocean of God’s love.

Your grandfather, my beloved children, was a great man.  Not as a warrior, nor as a statesman,
nor in any sense which is simply of the earth, earthy.  But he was great by being the possessor
of a rare combination of moral worth and Christian excellence, which made him a blessing to
his race.  In other words, he was great because he was truly good.  In the midst of his days
of usefulness he was cut off from the land of the living.

Affectionately yours, GRANDMA.

BELMONT, January 7, 1860

Letter Two

MY DEAR GRANDCHILDREN:

If you will look in your mother’s Bible, you will find that your grandfather, JOSEPH CHARLESS,
was born in Lexington, Kentucky, on the 17th of January, 1804; that his father, whose name
was also Joseph Charless, was born July 16th, 1772, in Westmeath, Ireland, being the only son
of Captain Edward Charles, whose father, (or paternal ancestor, John Charles), was born in
Wales and emigrated to Ireland in the year 1663.

Your great-grandfather, Jos. Charles, fled from his native country to France, in consequence
of his having been implicated in the Rebellion of 1795, “at the head of which figured the young
and noble Emmet, who fell a sacrifice for loving too well his enslaved country.” After remaining
a short time in France, he sailed for the United States of America, where he arrived in 1796,
landing at the city of New York. Upon his arrival in the United States he added an s to his
name to secure the Irish pronunciation of Charles, which makes it two syllables instead of
one, as pronounced by us.

He settled in Philadelphia, and being a printer by trade, he secured a situation with Matthew
Carey, “who, at that time, did the largest publishing business in the Quaker City.”  He often
boasted of having printed the first quarto edition of the Bible that was ever issued in the
United States.  In 1798 he married Mrs. Sarah McCloud, a widow (with one child), whose maiden
name was Jorden.

Sarah Jorden was born January 28, 1771, near Wilmington, Delaware.  During the American Revolution
her parents, with their family, were driven by the Hessians from their home in Delaware, and
resided subsequently in Philadelphia.

In the year 1800 Mr. and Mrs. Charless removed from Philadelphia to Lexington, Kentucky; to
Louisville in 1806, and to St. Louis in 1808.  In July of that year Mr. Charless founded the
“Missouri Gazette,” now known as the “Missouri Republican,” of which he was editor and sole
proprietor for many years.  This is the first newspaper of which St. Louis can boast, and I
am told it still has the largest circulation of any paper west of the Alleghany Mountains.

As regards the character of your great-grandfather, he was a noble specimen of the Irish gentleman-–impulsive-warm-heartedness
being his most characteristic trait. He was polite and hospitable, his countenance cheerful,
his conversation sprightly and humorous.  Sweet is the memory of the times when his children
and friends gathered around his plentiful board.  Often have we seen him entering his gateway,
followed by the mendicant, who would soon return thither literally laden down with provisions
from his well-stored larder.  His wife was no less hospitable, not less charitable and kind
to the poor, but more cautious.  She was of the utilitarian school, and could not bear to see
anything go to waste, or anything unworthily bestowed.  Not so easily touched with the appearance
of sorrow as her husband was, but always ready to relieve the wants of those she knew to be
destitute, she would herself administer to the sick with a full heart and a generous hand.
But she had a natural aversion to indolence, and would not give a penny to any she esteemed
so, lest it should tend to increase this unmeritorious propensity.  She was herself exceedingly
industrious, and took great delight in making her family comfortable, and, in fact, supplying
the wants of every living thing about her, even to the cat and the dog.  “She layeth her hands
to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff.  She riseth also while it is yet dark, and
giveth meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens.”

Both possessed honorable pride, and were plain, unpretending people, making no claim to an
aristocratic ancestry, but, after a long life spent in a growing city of considerable size,
they died, leaving many to speak their praises, and not one, that I have ever heard of, to
say aught against them.  He departed this life at the age of sixty-two, having enjoyed robust
health until within two weeks of his death.  His widow was “gathered as a shock of corn, fully
ripe, into the garner of the Lord,” at the advanced age of eight-one.

From an obituary notice of her I will quote the following lines: “Mrs. Sarah Charless was an
exemplary Christian, and was one of the most zealous and untiring in her exertions to build
up the Presbyterian Church established in this city under the pastoral care of the Rev. Salmon
Giddings.  Eminently charitable in her disposition, and ever willing to alleviate the evils
of others, she endeared to her all upon whom the hand of misfortune hung heavily.  Well was
it said of her by one of the most eminent men of our State–-the Hon. Edward Bates–-that she
was a woman upon whom the young man, far from friends and home, could always rely.”

Of a family of eight children, viz:  Robert McCloud, Edward, John, Joseph, Anne, Eliza, Chapman,
and Sarah Charless, Joseph alone was left in this pilgrimage word to mourn for his mother.
Eliza Wahrendorff, daughter of Anne Charless Wahrendorff, and Lizzie Charless, your own dear
mother, were the only grandchildren left to mingle their tears with his.  Great was the void
caused in our small family circle when this excellent woman, this aged Christian, this revered
and much loved parent was laid in the silent tomb.  It is sweet now to think about her love
of flowers, and how often she would say, when they commenced shooting up in early spring, that
they reminded her of the resurrection morning. May you, my dear mother, realize the blessedness
of this truth–-when Jesus shall bid his redeemed ones rise from the cold ground which has so
long shrouded them-–and come forth, more beautiful than the hyacinth, to bloom forever on the
borders of the river of life!  And may you, my sweet children, have a pleasant and happy childhood,
loving all that is lovely and hating all this is evil, that you may grow up to be good men
and women; and in old age, when memory fails, may you, like her, rejoice and revel again amid
the innocent scenes of early life, looking through them up to that glorious world above us,
where the “inhabitant shall no more say he is sick,” or shall feel the infirmities of age.

Affectionately,	GRANDMA.

Letter Three

MY DEAR GRANDCHILDREN:

You, Charless and Louis, often say to me, “Grandma, tell me about when you were a little girl,”
and many a little story have I told you. But now I am going to tell you about “Grandpa,” when
he was a little boy.

That dear, good grandpa, who looked young to grandma, but who looked so old to you, with his
pretty, glossy grey hair, was once a little boy, just like you are.  He had a dear mamma, too,
who tenderly loved him, but she used to punish him when he was naughty, and kiss him when he
was good, just as your mamma does to you.  He was a very obstinate little fellow, though, and
generally submitted to a good deal of punishment before he would confess his fault and beg
for forgiveness.  His mamma would sometimes tie him to the bed-post, but he would pull against
the string until his arm would almost bleed, and frequently he would free himself by gnawing
the cord in two.  But he was a good-humored little boy for all that, and “mischievous as a
house pig,” his mother used to say.  Once she locked him up, for some naughty trick, in a room
where there were a number of nice fresh made cheeses, arranged around for the purpose of drying,
and said to him, “Stay there, Joe, until you mean to be good, and then I will let you out.”
He very soon knocked at the door, calling out, “Mamma, mamma, I’ll be good now,” and his mamma
thought “my little son is conquered very soon this time; he is certainly improving.”  She opened
the door, but what, do you suppose, was her dismay, when she found that the “little rogue”
had bit a mouthful out of every cheese!

When he was a small child he strayed off from the house, away down to the spring, and, stooping
down to see the pretty clear water, fell in, and came near being drowned.  Oh, how his poor
mother did cry, when her sweet little boy was brought to her so pale, and almost lifeless.
But she rubbed him and warmed him until he came to, and was as well as ever; and his mamma
thought “surely such an accident will never again happen to my dear little son.”  But when
he grew to be a larger boy, some time after his parents had removed from Kentucky to St. Louis,
he went one day with some boys to have a swimming match in the Mississippi river.  But, thanks
to our Heavenly Father, this was not the case with little Joseph Charless, for, although he
was drawn by the current of the terrible Mississippi into a whirling eddy, he was saved from
such a dreadful doom.  A good, brave boy, who was larger than he, and a better swimmer, rushed
into the whirl and pulled him out to the shore. Poor little fellow! he was almost gone, for
he was insensible, and it was some time before he breathed freely again.  He was carried home–-to
that dear home which came so near being made desolate-–and with deep penitence did he confess
his fault and beg for pardon.  His last thoughts when he was drowning (as he thought) were,
“I have disobeyed my mother!  It will break my poor mother’s heart!”

Children have a great deal of curiosity, and perhaps you will ask, “how did grandma know so
much about grandpa when he was a little boy?  Was she a little girl then, and did she live
in St. Louis, too?” No, my children, when my parents moved to St. Louis I was a young lady
and grandpa was a young gentleman.  We soon became acquainted, however, and after awhile we
were married, and then I took a strange fancy to learn all about him from the time he was a
little baby in his mother’s arms; and when I ventured to ask his mother a few questions about
him, I found it pleased her so much that I was encouraged to ask many more. And now it seems
to me I have known grandpa always, and was with him when he used to go with his mamma and little
brothers and sisters into the country, with a company of the neighbors, all in little French
carts, to gather strawberries and blackberries, which grew in abundance in Lucas Place, Chouteau
avenue, and all about, where now are elegant mansions and paved streets.  It was then a prairie,
with clumps of trees here and there, springs of water and sweet wild flowers.

He told me himself about his frolics with the French boys (many of whom were his earliest and
truest friends), how they used to have match-eating pancake parties, in the day of the pancake
festival in the Catholic Church; and about his youthful gallantries, and how desperately in
love he was once with a very smart, pretty creole girl, and how the discovery of “a hole in
her stocking” drove the little god of love from his breast.

But these anecdotes and incidents were, perhaps, more interesting to his wife than they will
be to you.  Well, then, I will tell you an Indian story, for I have never known a boy yet that
did not like to hear about the Indians.  You know the poor things are now nearly exterminated
from the face of the earth.  In the early history of St. Louis, I find that they lived not
far off, having pitched their wigwams only a little farther to the west, for the white man,
in intruding upon their hunting grounds, had driven them, with the elk, the deer and the buffalo,
still farther from the Atlantic coast, which they once claimed as their own rightful property.
These poor savages, however, would often come into the town to see “the white-faced children
of the Great Spirit;” to buy their beads and other fine things to dress up in; and that they
might show them how fierce they looked, their faces streaked with every variety of paint, and
their hair all shaved off excepting a little bunch on the top of their heads which they reserved
as a fastening for their feathers and other head ornaments, of which they were very fond. 
But, I dare say, if you have never seen Indians, you have seen their pictures.  It was real
sport for the boys to see them dance, and listen to their wild songs and savage yells.

But to my story.  There was an old Indian who was a great thief. He was seen alone, generally,
prowling about the town, peeping through the fences into the yards, watching out for chickens,
or anything he could shoot with his arrow, or slip under his blanket.  Little Joseph Charless
had watched this famous old Indian thief, and determined to punish him for his wickedness.
To accomplish this purpose, he armed himself with plenty of dried squashes, which he kept in
the garret of his father’s house, near to the gable window, that fronted on the street.  He
watched his opportunity, and one day, as the Indian passed by, he threw a squash down upon
the old fellow’s head.  Soon after he peeped out to see if it had struck him, when whiz went
the arrow, just grazing his face and sticking tight and firm into the window beam above his
head!  This fright cured him of “playing tricks upon travelers,” at least for awhile.

You see now, my dear children, from what I have told you, that “grandpa” was just such a boy
as you are–-fond of fun and frolic, and of playing tricks.

I have said nothing of his love of school and books.  But I think he was about as fond of both
as boys usually are. When a little boy he was sent to the village school, and after he became
large enough to work, he was put to work in his father’s printing office.  By the time he became
a pretty good printer, a school of a higher grade than any St. Louis had yet afforded was opened
in the country, and his father gladly availed himself of this opportunity to continue the education
of his son.  He was a pupil in this school for some time, after which he commenced the study
of the law, agreeably to his father’s wishes, under the supervision of Francis Spalding, who
was at that time an eminent lawyer in St. Louis.  After having read law awhile, he was sent
to complete his legal education at the Transylvania University, Kentucky.

While in the printing office he and another boy received a terrible flogging one day for laughing
at a poor, unfortunate man, who had a very bad impediment in his speech, which being accompanied,
with ludicrous gestures and grimaces, was more than their youthful risibility could withstand.
They made a manly, but vain attempt to suppress a roar of laughter, which only gathered strength
from being dammed up, and at last burst over all bounds.  I never could forgive his father
for whipping the poor boys so severely for what they could not avoid.  He was too just and
generous a man, however, to have been so unmerciful, if his better feelings and his better
judgment had not been warped by a burst of passion.

The following is from the pen of his old friend and playmate, Mr. N. P., of St. Louis:

“You ask me to state what I know of the early character of your late husband.  This I proceed
to do.  In his boyhood there were not the same temptations in St. Louis to irregularity of
habits and vice that assail the young men of the present day.  I do not think I err when I
say that Joseph Charless was a good boy-–kind, tractable, obedient to his parents, and giving
them no further solicitude than such as every parent may well feel when watching the progress
of a son to manhood. He had no bad habits.  As a boy, there was nothing dishonorable about
him, and he had quite as few frailties, or weaknesses, as attach to any of us.  In the sports
and amusements of that day he stood well with his fellows, and was well received in ever society.
Of course, from what I have said, you will infer that he was of an amiable disposition, exhibiting
less of heated temper than most of us.  Not quick in inviting a quarrel, but, being in, defending
himself resolutely and manfully.  I do not think he was the favorite of his parents at that
day.  Edward was.  John, another brother, was passionate and hard to govern, but he was the
only one of the family who had these qualities in a marked degree.

“I think Joseph gave as little cause for anxiety to his parents and friends as any boy could
possibly do.  He has been taken from us, and I have written in a more public manner (as editor
of ‘The Republican’) my estimate of his character in all the relations of life,” &c.,&c.

At the age of twelve years, his brother John, who was two years older than himself, was taken
sick and died.  This was the first great sorrow that your dear grandfather ever knew.  I have
often heard him speak of it, but never without a shade passing over his countenance, denoting
that time could not efface the recollection of that painful event.  Oh, how his loving young
heart must have swelled with unutterable grief when his playmate brother lay in his coffin,
so still and cold, his hands clasped upon his breast, with cheeks so pale, and his bright blue
eyes dimmed and closed!  But grandpa still had brothers and sisters left, and a kind father
and mother.  The world which looked so dark, soon became a pleasant world to him again; the
flowers looked pretty and the air was fresh, and he was again seen sporting and romping.  But
at night, when he knelt down to pray, and his thoughts went up to Heaven, he would think of
his brother, and, weeping, to relieve his little, aching heart, he would go to bed, feeling
lonely and sad.

Did you ever think what a blessing it is to go to sleep, my dear little children?  What pleasant
dreams; and how gay and bright the morning appears after a good night’s rest upon a comfortable
bed.  And do you ever think how good God is to have given you a praying mother, when so many
little children have never heard of God or Heaven? Grandpa had a Christian mother, too, and
she taught him to pray.  She told him all about the great God who made Heaven and earth, and
all things, and about his SON JESUS, who came into the world as a little child; that, though
rich, he became poor, and was laid in a manger. This blessed Jesus is your friend.  He can
hear, and he can answer your prayers, and knows all you think and feel, all that you say and do.

Affectionately yours, GRANDMA.

BELMONT, January, 1860.

Letter Four

MY DEAR GRANDCHILDREN:

Twelve months have elapsed since I first made an attempt, by writing, to make you acquainted
with your beloved grandfather, who departed this life on the 4th of June, 1859.

I am still a mourner-–such an one as I hope, as I earnestly pray, none of you may ever be.
My poor heart is desolate!  I have no home in this world, and I long for Heaven.  I would gladly
lay me down in the grave, but God knows what is best for me, and He does all things well. 
Then to my task, for I have a portrait to make-–a portrait for you to look at, to imitate,
to love, and to reverence.  Not a likeness of the external man: you have that to perfection-–so
perfect that a friend, who knew him well, remarked, upon looking at it, that the artist must
have been inspired.  But to show the inner life and the daily walk of that dear man who, for
twenty-seven years, six months and twenty-seven days, was the sharer of my joys and sorrows,
and the prop of my earthly existence, is a more delicate task.  In a few words I could sum
up his life and character, for there was nothing extraordinary in it, excepting extraordinary
goodness; but, then, how could my dear children, from a few abstract ideas thrown hastily together,
see the path he trod, in all its windings, compare it with that of others, and with their own,
and learn the lessons it teaches? I do not mean by “extraordinary goodness” that your grandfather
had no faults-–that he never did wrong-–for then, you know, he would have been an angel, not a man.

With these preliminaries, I shall endeavor, in much weakness, to set him before you in such
a light that you will not fail to see and understand him, and to feel, too, the sweet influences
of a presence that always brought with it happiness and peace.

On the 8th of May, 1830, my father, Captain Peter Blow, arrived at St. Louis with his family,
consisting of my mother, my two sisters, my four brothers, and myself.  We landed at the wharf
of our future home on the steamer Atlantic.  This being the finest boat that had ever reached
this distant western city, the Captain, who was evidently proud of it, proposed to give to
the good citizens of this goodly city of ten thousand inhabitants a select pleasure-party on
board of her, that, with music, dancing and feasting, they might, to the best advantage, appreciate
its dimensions, its comforts and elegancies.  My sisters and self having accepted the cordial
invitation of the Captain, who had treated us with great kindness and consideration while passengers
on his boat, and, attended by our father and a gentleman whom we had formerly known, and who
had been residing in the city for a few months, made our appearance for the first time in St.
Louis society.  Our mother, who was a perfect pattern of propriety, advised us to equip ourselves
in our nicest street dresses, and, being strangers, not to participate at all in the dance.
Consequently, we were there in the position of “lookers-on in Vienna.”  We made good use of
our eyes, and kept time to the music in our hearts, but used our feet only in promenading.
During the evening I observed several ladies with much interest, but was greatly attracted
with but one gentleman, whom I first noticed sitting opposite to us, leaning back in his chair.
There was a calm serenity overspreading his handsome features, which wore a joyousness of expression
that was irresistible.  I pointed him out to our escort, and inquired who he was.  He could
not tell me; still I could not but observe him.  He waltzed once with the belle of the evening
(a Miss Selby). My eyes followed them; and I see your dear grandfather now, just as he looked
then.  He was about the medium size –-five feet nine inches high, and well proportioned; his
complexion rather fair, hair dark. At the suggestion of his relative, Commodore Johnstone, in
an unlucky moment he inscribed his book to the Duke of Buccleugh. This nobleman had declared
his acceptance of the dedication in a manner so gracious, that Mickle was once more decoyed with
the hope of having found a powerful protector.

After an interval of some months, he learnt that his incense had not been permitted to enter the
nostrils of the new idol, and that his offering lay, where he left it, without the slightest
notice. For this disappointment he might have considered it to be
some compensation that his work had procured him the kindness of those
who were more able to estimate it.

Mr. Crowe assisted him in compiling the notes; Lowth offered to ordain him, with the promise
of making some provision for him in the church; and one, whose humanity and candour are among
the chief ornaments of the bench on which Lowth then sate, Doctor Bathurst, soothed him by
those benevolent offices which he delights to extend to the neglected and the oppressed. Nor were
the public insensible to the value of his translation. A second edition was called for in 1778;
and his gains amounted on the whole to near a thousand pounds, a larger sum than was likely
to fall to the share of an author, who so little understood the art of making his way in the
world.

It was not, however, considerable enough to last long against the calls made on it for the
payment of old debts, and for the support of his sisters; and he was devising further means of
supplying his necessities by a subscription for his poems, when Commodore Johnstone (in 1779)
being appointed to head a squadron of ships, nominated him his secretary, on board the Romney.
Mickle had hitherto struggled through a life of anxiety and indigence; but a gleam of prosperity
came over the few years that remained. A good share of prize-money fell to his lot; and the
squadron having been fortunately ordered to Lisbon, he was there received with so much distinction,
that it would seem as if the Portuguese had been willing to make some amends for their neglect
of Camoens, by the deference which they shewed his translator.

Prince John, the uncle to the Queen, was ready on the Quay to welcome him at landing; and
during a residence of more than six months he was gratified by the attentions of the principal
men of the country. At the first institution of the Royal Academy at Lisbon, he was enrolled one of
the Members.

Here he composed Almada Hill, an epistle from Lisbon, which was published in the next year;
and designing to write a History of Portugal, he brought together some materials for that purpose.

When
he had returned to England, he was so much enriched by his agency for the disposal of the prizes which
had been made during the cruise, and by his own portion of the prize-money,
that he was enabled to discharge honourably the claims which his creditors
still had on him, and to settle himself with a prospect of independence
and ease.

He accordingly married Mary, the daughter of Mr. Robert Tompkins, of Forrest-hill, and took
a house at Wheatley, a little village about five miles from Oxford. Some interruption to his
tranquillity occurred from the failure of a banker, with whom his agency had connected him,
and from a chancery suit, in which he too hastily engaged to secure a part of his wife's fortune.
He then resumed his intention of publishing his poems by subscription,
and continued still to exercise his pen.

His remaining productions were a tract, entitled The Prophecy of Queen Emma, an ancient Ballad,
&c., with Hints towards a Vindication of the Authenticity of the Poems of Ossian and Rowley
(in 1782), and some essays, called Fragments of Leo, and some reviews of books, both which he
contributed to the European Magazine.

He died after a short illness, on the 25th of October, 1788, at Forrest-hill, while on a visit
at the house of his father-in-law; and was buried at that place. He left one son, who was
an extra-clerk in the India House, in 1806, when the Life of Mickle was written by the Rev.
John Sim, a friend on whom he enjoined that task, and who, I doubt
not, has performed it with fidelity.

Mickle was a man of strong natural powers, which he had not always
properly under controul.

When he is satisfied to describe with little apparent effort what
he has himself felt or conceived, as in his ballads and songs, he
is at times eminently happy.

He has generally erred on the side of the too much rather than of the too little. His defect is not
so much want of genius as of taste. His thoughts were forcible and vivid; but the words in which
he clothed them, are sometimes ill-chosen, and sometimes awkwardly disposed. He degenerates occasionally
into mere turgidness and verbosity, as in the following lines:

Oh, partner of my infant grief and joys! Big with the scenes now past my heart o'erflows, Bids each
endearment fair at once to rise, And dwells luxurious on her melting woes.

When his stanza forced him to lop off this vain superfluity of words, that the sense might be
brought within a narrower compass, he succeeded better. Who would suppose, that these verses
could have proceeded from the same man that had written the well known song, beginning "And
are ye sure the news is true," from which there is not a word that can he taken without injury,
and which seems so well to answer the description of a simple and popular song in Shakspeare?

--It
is old and plain: The songsters, and the knitters in the sun, And the free maids that weave
their threads with bone, Do use to chaunt it. It is silly sooth, And dallies with the innocence
of love, Like the old age.

Syr Martyn is the longest of his poems. He could not have chosen a subject in itself much less capable
of embellishment. But whatever the pomp of machinery or profuseness of description could contribute
to its decoration has not been spared. After an elaborate invocation of the powers that preside over
the stream of Mulla, a "reverend wizard" is conjured up in the eye of the poet; and the wizard
in his turn conjures up scene after scene, in which appear the hopeful
young knight, Syr Martyn, "possest of goodly Baronie," the dairy-maid,
Kathrin, by whose wiles he is inveigled into an illicit amour, the
good aunt who soon dies of chagrin at this unworthy attachment, the
young brood who are the offspring of the ill-sorted match, his brother,
an openhearted sailor, who is hindered by the artifices of Kathrin
from gaining access to the house, and lastly, the "fair nymph Dissipation,"
with whom Syr Martyn seeks refuge from his unpleasant recollections,
and who conspires with "the lazy fiend, Self-Imposition," to conduct
him to the "dreary cave of Discontent," where the poet leaves him,
and "the reverend wizard"

(for aught we hear to the contrary) in his company. Mean and familiar incidents and characters
do not sort well with allegory, which requires beings that are themselves somewhat removed
from the common sphere of human nature to meet and join it a little beyond the limits of this
world. Yet in this tale, incongruous and disjointed as the dream of a sick man, velut aegri somnia,
he has interspersed some lines, and even whole stanzas, to which the poet or the painter may
turn again and again with delight, though the common reader will
scarce find them sufficient to redeem the want of interest that pervades
the whole.

His elegy on Mary, Queen of Scots, is also a vision, but it is better managed, at once mournful and
sweet. He has thrown a pall of gorgeous embroidery over the bloody hearse of Mary.

Wolfwold and Ella, of which the story was suggested by a picture of Mortimer's, is itself a
picture, in which the fine colouring and spirited attitudes reconcile us to its horrors.

His tragedy is a tissue of love and intrigue, with sudden starts of passion, and unprepared and
improbable turns of resolution and temper. Towards the conclusion, one of the female characters
puts an end to herself, for little apparent reason, except that it is the fifth act, and some
blood must therefore be shed; Garrick's refusal, in all likelihood,
spared him the worse mortification of seeing it rejected on the stage.

Yet there is here and there in it a masterly touch like the following:

Either my mind has lost its energy, Or the unbodied spirits of my fathers, Beneath the night's
dark wings, pass to and fro, In doleful agitation hovering round me. Methought my father,
with a mournful look, Beheld me. Sudden from unconscious pause I wak'd, and but his marble bust was
here.

Almada Hill has some just sentiments, and some pleasing imagery; but both are involved in the
mazes of an unskilful or ambitious phraseology, from which it is a work of trouble to extricate
them. It was about this time, that the laboured style in poetry had reached its height. Not "to
loiter into prose," of which Lyttelton bade him beware, was the grand aim; and in their eagerness
to leave prose as far behind them as possible, the poets were in danger of outstripping the
understanding and feelings of their readers. It was this want of ease and perspicuity in his longer pieces,
which prevented Mickle from being as much a favourite with the public, as many who were far his
inferiors in the other qualities of a poet. When a writer is obscure, only because his reasoning
is too abstruse, his fancy too lively, or his allusions too learned for the vulgar, it is more
just that we should complain of ourselves for not being able to rise to his level, than of him
for not descending to our's. But let the difficulty arise from mere imperfections of language,
and the consciousness of having solved an involuntary enigma is scarcely sufficient to reward
our pains.

The translation of the Lusiad is that by which he is best known. In this, as in his original poems,
the expression is sometimes very faulty; but he is never flat or insipid. In the numbers, there is
much sweetness and freedom: and though they have somewhat of the masculine melody of Dryden,
yet they have something also that is peculiarly his own. He has in a few instances enriched
the language of poetry by combinations unborrowed from any of his predecessors. It is doubtful
whether as much can be said for Pope's translation of Homer. Almost all who have written much in
the couplet measure, since Waller clipped it into uniformity, have been at times reduced to
the necessity of eking out their lines in some way or other so as to make the sense reach its
prescribed bound. Most have done it by means of epithets, which were always found to be "friends
in need." Mickle either breaks the lines with a freedom and spirit which were then unusual, or
repeats something of what has gone before, a contrivance that ought
to be employed sparingly, and used chiefly when it is desirable to
produce the effect of sweetness.

The preference which he sometimes claims in the notes for his author, above the other epic poets
of ancient and modern times, is less likely to conciliate the good opinion than to excite the
disgust of his readers. There is no artifice that a translator can resort to with less chance
of success, than this blowing of the showman's trumpet as he goes on exhibiting the wonders
of his original.

There are some puerile hyperboles, for which I know not whether he or Camoens is responsible;
such as--

The mountain echoes catch the big swoln sighs. The yellow sands with tears are silver'd o'er.

Johnson
told him that he had once intended to translate the Lusiad. The version would have had fewer faults,
but it may be questioned whether the general result would have been as much animation and harmony
as have been produced by Mickle.

In addition to the poems, which were confessedly his, there are no less than seventeen in Mr.
Evans's collection of Ballads, of which a writer in the Quarterly Review[1] some years ago expressed
his suspicion that they were from the pen of Mickle. It has been found on inquiry, that the suggestion
of this judicious critic is fully confirmed. One of these has lately been brought into notice
from its having formed the groundwork of one of those deservedly popular stories, which have
lately come to us from the north of the Tweed. It is to be wished that Mickle's right in all of
them were formally recognized, and that they should be no longer withheld from their place amongst
his other poetical writings, to which they would form so valuable an accession.

FOOTNOTE [1] For May 1810, No. VI. The title of the Ballads are Bishop Thurston, and the King of
Scots, Battle of Caton Moor, Murder of Prince Arthur, Prince Edward, and Adam Gordon, Cumner
Hall, Arabella Stuart, Anna Bullen, the Lady and the Palmer, The Fair Maniac, The Bridal Bed,
The Lordling Peasant, The Red Cross Knight, The Wandering Maid, The Triumph of Death, Julia,
The Fruits of Jealousy, and The Death of Allen.

* * * * *

JAMES BEATTIE.

James Beattie was born on the 25th of October, 1735, at Laurencekirk, in the county of Kincardine,
in Scotland. His father, who kept a small shop in that place, and rented a little farm near
it, is said to have been a man of acquirements superior to his condition. At his death, the management
of his concerns devolved on his widow. David, the eldest of her six children, was of an age
to assist his mother. James, the youngest, she placed at the parish school of his native village,
which about forty years before had been raised to some celebrity
by Ruddiman, the grammarian, and was then kept by one Milne.

This man had also a competent skill in grammar. His other deficiencies were supplied by the natural
quickness of his pupil, and by the attention of Mr. Thomson, the minister of Laurencekirk, who,
being a man of learning, admitted young Beattie to the use of his
library, and probably animated him by his encouragement.

He very early became sensible to the charms of English verse, to which he was first awakened
by the perusal of Ogilby's Virgil. Before he was ten years old, he was as well acquainted with
that writer and Homer, as the versions of Pope and Dryden could make him. His schoolfellows distinguished
him by the name of the Poet.

At the age of fourteen, he was sent to Marischal College, Aberdeen, where he attended the Greek
class, taught by Dr. Blackwell, author of the Memoirs of the Court of Augustus, and was by
him singled out as the most promising of his scholars. The slender pittance spared him by his
mother would scarcely have sufficed for his support, if he had not added to it one of the bursaries
or pensions that were bestowed on the most deserving candidates. Of a discourse which he was
called on to deliver at the Divinity Hall, it was observed, that he spoke poetry in prose.
Thomson was censured for a similar impropriety in one of his youthful exercises; but Beattie gained
the applause of his audience.

His academical education being completed, on the 1st of August, 1753, he was satisfied with the humble
appointment of parish-clerk and schoolmaster at the village of Fordoun, about six miles distant
from Laurencekirk. Here he attracted the notice of Mr. Garden, at that time sheriff of the
county, and afterwards one of the Scotch judges, with the appellation of Lord Gardenstown.
In a romantic glen near his house, he chanced to find Beattie with pencil and paper in his hand;
and, on questioning him, discovered that he was engaged in the composition of a poem. Mr. Garden desired
to see some of his other poems; and doubting whether they were his own productions, requested
him to translate the invocation to Venus at the opening of Lucretius, which Beattie did in
such a manner as to remove his incredulity. In this retirement, he also became known to Lord
Monboddo, whose family seat was in the parish; and a friendly intercourse ensued, which did not
terminate till the death of that learned but visionary man.

In 1758, he was removed from his employment at Fordoun, to that of usher in the Grammar School
at Aberdeen, for which he had been an unsuccessful competitor in the preceding year, but was now
nominated without the form of a trial.

At Aberdeen, his heart seems to have taken up its rest; for no temptations could afterwards
seduce him for any length of time to quit it. The professorship of Natural Philosophy in the
Marischal College, where he had lately been a student, being vacant in 1760, Mr. Arbuthnot, one
of his friends, exerted himself with so much zeal in the behalf of Beattie, that he obtained
that appointment; although the promotion was such as his most sanguine wishes did not aspire to.
Soon after he was further gratified, by being permitted to exchange
it for the professorship of Moral Philosophy and Logic, for which
he thought himself better fitted.

In discharge of the duties belonging to his new function, he immediately entered on a course
of lectures, which, as appears from his diary in the possession of Sir William Forbes, he repeated
with much diligence for more than thirty years.

This occupation could not have been very favourable to his poetical
propensity.

He had, since his twentieth year, been occasionally a contributor of verse to the Scots Magazine;
and in 1760, he published a collection of poems, inscribed to the Earl of Erroll, to whose
intervention he had been partly indebted for the office he held in the college. Though the
number of these pieces was not considerable, he omitted several of them in subsequent editions,
and among others a translation of Virgil's Eclogues, some specimens of which, adduced in a
letter written by Lord Woodhouselee, author of the Principles of Translation, will stand a comparison
with the parallel passages in Dryden and Warton.

In the summer of 1763, his curiosity led him for the first time to London, where Andrew Millar the
bookseller, was almost his only acquaintance. Of this journey no particular is recorded but that
he visited Pope's house at Twickenham.

In 1765, having sent a letter of compliment to Gray, then on a visit to the Earl of Strathmore,
he was invited to Glammis Castle, the residence of that nobleman, to meet the English poet,
in whom he found such a combination of excellence as he had hitherto been a stranger to. This
appears from a letter written to Sir William Forbes, his faithful friend and biographer, with
whom his intimacy commenced about the same time.

I am sorry you did not see Mr. Gray on his return; you would have been much pleased with him.
Setting aside his merit as a poet, which, however, in my opinion, is greater than any of his
contemporaries can boast, in this or in any other nation, I found him possessed of the most
exact taste, the soundest judgment, and the most extensive learning. He is happy in a singular
facility of expression. His conversation abounds in original observations, delivered with no
appearance of sententious formality, and seeming to arise spontaneously, without study or premeditation.
I passed two very agreeable days with him at Glammis, and found him
as easy in his manners, and as communicative and frank as I could
have wished.

Gray could not have requited him with such excess of admiration; but continued during the rest
of his life to regard Beattie with affection and esteem.

It was not till the spring of this year, when his Judgment of Paris was printed, that he again
appeared before the public as an author. This piece he inserted in the next edition of his
poems, in 1766, but his more mature judgment afterwards induced him to reject it. Some satirical
verses on the death of Churchill, at first published without his name, underwent the same fate.
The Wolf and the Shepherds, a Fable, and an Epistle to the Rev. Mr. Thomas Blacklock, which appeared
in the second edition, he also discarded from those subsequently published. He now projected and
began the Minstrel, the most popular of his poems. Had the original plan been adhered to, it
would have embraced a much wider scope.

In 1767, he married Mary,
the daughter of Dr. Dun, rector of the Grammar School at Aberdeen.
This union was not productive of the happiness which a long course
of previous intimacy had entitled him to expect. The object of his
choice inherited from her mother a constitutional malady which at
first shewed itself in capricious waywardness, and at length broke
out into insanity.

From this misery he sought refuge in the exercise
of his mind. His residence at Aberdeen had brought him into the society
of several among his countrymen who were engaged in researches well
suited to employ his attention to its utmost stretch. Of these the
names of Reid, author of An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles
of Common Sense--and Campbell, Principal of Marischal College, author
of An Essay on Miracles, are the most distinguished. His own correspondence
with his friends about this time evinces deep concern at the progress
of the sceptical philosophy, diffused by the writings of Hobbes, Hume,
Mandeville, and even, in his opinion, of Locke and Berkeley. Conceiving
the study of metaphysics itself to be the origin of this mischief,
in order that the evil might be intercepted at its source, he proposed
to demonstrate the futility of that science, and to appeal to the
common sense and unsophisticated feelings of mankind, as the only
infallible criterion on subjects in which it had formerly been made
the standard.

With this short sketch of the life and character of my parents, from which you can form an
idea of the peculiar characteristics and dispositions of their children, who now have become
so intimately associated with your grandfather, I will proceed to say, that, after the death
of my father, which occurred in June, just eleven months after that of my mother, he at once
became our loving and beloved head. We took an affectionate leave of his dear parents, and
removed into our own "rented house;" and that you may be enabled to place us there, I will
describe our two best rooms, which were separated by a folding-door, and used as parlor and
dining rooms.  They were neatly furnished, with nice ingrain carpets, cane-bottom chairs, an
extension dining table, and very pretty, straw-colored Venetian window-blinds, trimmed with
dark blue cords and tassels. A mahogany work-stand--the only article ordered from "the east,"
because it was a gift for his wife--was placed in the parlor, for it was too pretty to stay
up stairs, (perhaps the emptiness of the parlor made me think so).

Now, my dear children, you may laugh, and, perhaps, feel ashamed that your grandparents should
have started in life with so little, and that so plain, especially if you hear others boasting
of the wealth and grandeur of theirs. But, when I tell you that after awhile we had a nice
sofa, (bought at auction, because it was cheap), and that at another time a small side-board
was provided, in like manner, by that dear grandpa, who always did the best he could; and when
I tell you that "grandma" was so happy, and so well satisfied; that nobody's house--not even
those furnished in the most expensive manner, with the richest carpets, the most massive and
elegant furniture, mirrored and draped in costly brocatelle--looked half so sweet and pretty
to her; when you know, my dear children, and understand, that those people who have so far
deteriorated, by false teaching, and the glitter of the world, as to esteem such things more
highly than the far richer treasures of the heart, which alone can garnish a home with unsullied
beauty, and feel the pity and contempt for them that I do, these trifling baubles will take
their appropriate place, and you will see life as it is, and value it for what is pure and
genuine--not for that which is false and worthless.

On the 8th of November--exactly one year after our marriage --your dear mother (then our sweet
little Lizzie) was born. Not long after this, I was taken extremely ill with a fever, which
lasted many, many weeks. My dear husband is now seen as the tender and devoted nurse. With
my sisters, he watched beside me, with his own hands wringing out the flannels from strong,
hot lotions, and applying them to my aching limbs, which gave relief (but that only momentary)
when as hot as could be borne. No nurse could be procured. The few that were in the city had
left from fright when the cholera made its appearance there that fall, and had not returned.
But "grandpa" never wearied in attentions to his wife. After the violence of my disease had
abated, and I was pronounced by my physicians "out of danger," I continued weak and in a bad
state of health for months. Still, how thoughtful, how watchful and attentive he was! Often
at night have I waked, and the first object that would meet my eyes would be my husband, walking
to and fro with the baby in his arms, trying to hush her to sleep, lest she should disturb me.

For at least six months after my partial recovery my limbs had to be bandaged, to lessen the
swelling. No one but he could do this properly. At night he would prepare the bandages, by
rolling them tightly, and in the morning, immediately after returning from market, (that he
might not lose time from business), he would go through with the tedious process of bandaging--meanwhile
keeping up a cheerful conversation, which is so reviving to the invalid; and, after breakfast,
he would return to my room, to bid me an affectionate adieu, before leaving for the store.

During this sorrowful year, my dear husband lost both of his sisters. Mrs. Wahrendorff died
in November; Mrs. Kerr the May following. In this severe dispensation he derived comfort from
the belief that they had exchanged this for a better world, for they both had a well-grounded
hope in the merits of a crucified Redeemer; and, even while he mourned for his sisters, he
was cheerful.

It is surprising how much real happiness we can have in the midst of trouble, when the heart
is right; and it is surprising, too, how much real misery we can have in the midst of prosperity,
when there is everything apparently to make life pleasant and blissful, when the heart is wrong.

You know the little song, "Kind words can never die." "Grandma" realizes to-day that they never
do; nor kind looks either, nor good deeds.  With the God of love, nothing is small. He stoops
"to feed the young ravens when they cry," and yet there are men, (not many, I hope), who, from
pride, selfishness, and ill-nature, imagine that, as "lords of creation," it is utterly beneath
them to minister with their own hands to the sick and feeble, not even excepting the wife of
their bosoms. Life is made up of little things. "A cup of cold water" from the hand of a loving,
gentle, sympathizing friend, does more to alleviate suffering than rich gifts bestowed by the
unfeeling and the proud; than many luxuries provided by the harsh and exacting.

I have first particularized, and then drawn a contrast, my dear children, that you may be the
better able to see the beauty and excellency of true goodness; and that, like your grandfather,
who has gone to reap the reward, through grace, of a well-spent life, you may be self-denying,
gentle, loving, and kind.

Devotedly yours, GRANDMA.

Belmont, January, 1861.

Letter Seven

My Dear Grandchildren:

With a return of comparative good health, "grandma" is again enabled to resume her duties as
housekeeper, and is daily seen, with "grandpa," presiding at their family board. Our sisters
and brothers, with two young men from "the store," (who, from motives of economy, board with
us), and our little daughter, who sits to the left of her father, in her baby dining-chair,
constitute the family. How cheerful the scene, after months of sickness and anxiety! "Grandpa,"
at least, is radiant with happiness and good-humor. No unpleasant word or look is seen or heard
during our family repast. Perhaps an awkward boy upsets his cup of coffee, but the quaint remark,
"accidents will happen in the best regulated families," spoken with a native courtesy, rarely
seen, restores his equilibrium; and thus peacefully, (in the main), day after day passes along,
although many little perplexities and cares arise, such as every family are subject to, especially
where there are sons just entering the dangerous and tempting paths of youth.

In my particular duties and unavoidable anxieties I had a warm and sympathizing friend, and
a good counsellor, in the person of my precious husband. But I felt that I needed more than
this to sustain me in the cares, and trials, and sorrows of life. And, besides, I carried about
with me a troubled conscience. For, at the commencement of my illness, in the fall of 1832,
I was perfectly aware of the approach of danger, and, as I took a look from this world into
Eternity, all was dark and void, and the thought of having to meet death thus alarmed me. While
a raging fever was fast making me wild, I drew the sheet up over my face, and said, "Let me
be quiet."  All was stilled, no sound being heard, save an occasional whisper from some loved
one, (who was too anxious to be mute), and my own quick breathing, while my heart was struggling
for communion with God. Vague as were my ideas of that glorious Being, I prayed that He might
spare my life, promising, most solemnly, that if He should do so, I would, upon my recovery,
turn my attention to the consideration of Divine Truth; that I would search the Scriptures,
to know what they taught, and, should I be assured that the Bible contained a revelation from
Heaven, I would, in the future, govern my life by its precepts and doctrines.

Weak and sinful as this prayer was, I believe the God of pity heard and answered it; for, notwithstanding
my disinclination to the fulfilment of this vow, made under circumstances so appalling, He
bore with me, but never allowed me to forget it. Every appearance of evil --and especially
the return of the cholera in our midst the next fall --seemed to me, "like the fingers upon
the wall," ready to write my doom. I often tried to become interested in reading the Bible,
but that sacred book possessed no charm to me. I found it a hard and unpleasant task to read
it at all. At length I summoned up courage to communicate my difficulties and fears to my husband.
Prompt in action, he immediately purchased for me "Scott's Commentary," which, he said, would
aid me in understanding the Bible; the want of which, he thought, was the reason I could feel
no interest in it. He was right; for, before I had finished the book of Matthew, with the systematic
and attentive reading of "the notes" and "practical observations," I was convinced that this
was none other than the word of that great Being who had made and preserved me all the days
of my life. This blessed book--which, hitherto, had been a sealed book to me--now seemed to
glow with real life, and unwonted beauty! It was no difficult task for me then, hour after
hour, to pore over its sacred pages.

Your grandfather, at this time, was only a nominal believer. He had not earnestly examined
this all-important matter, and made it a personal one. Engrossed in business, young and healthy,
he no doubt felt, like thousands of others, that there was time enough for him to attend to
the interests of his soul, (which, to the natural heart, is insipid, if not distasteful); but,
when he saw his wife so deeply interested, he did all he could to encourage her. He knelt with
her at the bedside in secret prayer, conversed with her on the subject, went with her to church,
and sympathized with her; until, as a reward, I truly believe, for all his kindness to me,
at a time when I was ashamed of myself--ashamed to let anyone know (even him) that I felt the
weight of unpardoned sin-–“God touched his heart as with a live coal from off His altar." 
So, hand and heart, we went together. Sweet is the memory of the ever-to-be-remembered day,
when, "in the presence of men and of angels, we avouched the Lord JEHOVAH to be our God, the
object of our supreme love and delight; the Lord Jesus Christ to be our Saviour from sin and
death, our Prophet, Priest, and King; and the Holy Ghost, our Illuminator, Sanctifier, Comforter,
and Guide;" when we gave ourselves away in "a covenant, never to be revoked, to be his willing
servants forever, humbly believing that we had been redeemed, not with corruptible things,
as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of the Son of God."

How different is the scene now presented at that fireside, where no God had heretofore been
acknowledged! For, morning and evening, we surround the Throne of Grace; the Bible is read,
a hymn sung, and that sweet voice, which we shall hear no more on earth, with a full confession
of sin and unworthiness, humbly pleads with Him "in whom we live, and move, and have our being."
A blessing is asked at our meals; preparations are made on Saturday for the holy Sabbath, that
no unnecessary work may be done on that day, and servants are exhorted to improve its sacred hours.

After having dedicated ourselves to the service of the living God, we took our little Lizzie--the
dearest, richest treasure of our heart and life--and presented her, in the solemn ordinance
of baptism, to that Saviour who, when all earth, "took little children in his arms and blessed
them," and there promised to pray with, and for her; to impart to her the knowledge of God's
holy word, and to bring her up, not for this vain and perishing world, but for Heaven.

Now, my dear children, that I have given you a peep into the home and household of your grandparents,
when your mamma was a little babe--before and after they became members of the Church--I will
proceed, by telling you that, during that summer, (in July, 1834), your beloved grandfather
met with another heavy bereavement, in the death of his father. None were then left of all
that united and happy family circle, which caused the homestead to ring with mirth when "grandma,"
as a bride, first became a member of it, excepting his mother, his brother Edward, and himself.
Deep sorrow pervaded our souls, most of all because, before this sad event, we had learned
to feel, most keenly, the importance of a careful preparation for "the great change," which
we do not know that his father ever made. But, (as I once heard a minister say at a funeral),
"we will leave him where he left himself, in secret with his God," with the hope that he was
enabled, by that grace which is rich in Christ Jesus, to "make his calling and election sure."

Life is made up of lights and shadows, and, before closing this letter, I will give you an
account of a delightful little journey which we made early in September of that year.

Your mamma, who was then just twenty-two months old, was quite delicate, and we thought a little
trip into the country would be of service to her; and her papa, having some business in Illinois
that would cause an absence of ten or twelve days, concluded to hitch up our little barouche
and take us with him. So we started, in fine style, on a beautiful morning--"grandpa," and
"grandma," our little Lizzie; and her nurse--which, with a small trunk, a carpet-bag, and a
little basket, containing some crackers, etc., for the baby, quite filled the carriage.

I’ll tell you there is no such traveling these days of railroads and steam boats! Every body
is in too great a hurry to stop and go slowly, as we did in our little barouche, trotting gently
along across the prairies of Illinois. How balmy and bracing the air; how quiet the scene;
how beautiful the prairies! Some four, some ten, some twenty miles in width--all covered with
tall grasses and a profusion of large autumn flowers that waved in graceful undulations before
the sweeping breeze. An apt representation of a gently swelling sea, upon whose dark green
waves, nature had emptied her lap of richly varied blossoms. We traveled from twenty-five to
thirty miles per day; starting early in the morning--while yet the dew glittered before the
rising sun. We always took care to learn from our host, the distance and situation of the next
good stopping place, where we might dine, and rest a few hours in the heat of the day, after
which we would again "hitch up" and start refreshed and strengthened for our evening ride.
What magnificent sunsets! How picturesque the woodland bordering of these beautiful prairies,
with here and there an humble residence, and a cultivated field. We could not but lift our
hearts in adoration and praise.

“If God has made this world so fair, where sin and death abound, How beautiful, beyond compare,
will Paradise be found.”

On we went--passing occasionally through neat little villages, sometimes large towns, such
as, Springfield and Jacksonville--until we reached Lewiston, where we spent the Sabbath and
attended the village church. In the afternoon of the next day we went to Canton which was the
end of our journey. And when "grandpa" had transacted his business there we turned our faces
homeward.

The first day upon our return, we lost our way--then appeared clouds and mists, just enough
rain falling, to make the high hills we had to climb, slippery and hard upon our poor horse,
who manfully pulled away without flagging, until we found a shelter for the night; which, although
a wretched one we were very thankful for. From this time, there is but a faint impression left
upon my mind of our return, until within a few miles of Alton, when, as the sun was fast sinking
into his glorious bed of cloud and fire (giving strong indications of an approaching storm),
my anxious husband, after having made a strenuous but vain attempt to obtain a shelter for
the night "whipped up" his jaded horse and pressed forward.

It grew dark rapidly. As we passed from the open prairie into the dense forest, we seemed to
leave light and hope behind us--for cloud and tempest, lightning, and loud claps of thunder
quickly succeeded. For awhile we could discern the road; at length, enveloped in total darkness,
it was to be seen, only by the flashes of lightning, which, while it horrified our horse and
ourselves, served to guide us and also to show us our danger, from the tall trees as they swung
to and fro above and around us. About nine o'clock we discovered (as we thought) in the distance
a light from a window, of which we were soon assured --and our fears allayed by hearing "the
watch-dog's honest bark."

Next day we reached our snug little home, where we entertained the family with the incidents
of our trip--its pleasures, hair-breadth escapes, &c.  None were more delighted in that group
than our sweet Lizzie, who brought the roses of the prairie home upon her little checks, which
were more than a reward for a few untoward events of that delightful and long remembered journey.
I think his father had deferred making his will until his last illness. At any rate it was
not until then that his son, Joseph, learned (from his brother-in-law, Mr. John Kerr), the
contents of his father's will, which were, in substance, as follows: Joseph was to inherit
all of his father's estate, excepting a lot of ground, fronting on Walnut street, of sixty
feet, which was bequeathed to his mother. Thus his brother, Edward, was disinherited.  Eliza
Wahrendorff, the only child of your grandfather's sister, who afterwards became the wife of
my brother, Taylor Blow, had, by the death of her parents, inherited a beautifully improved
lot of sixty feet front, on Market street, which was the gift of Eliza's grandfather to her
mother, Ann Charless.  Edward Charless had unfortunately displeased his father; for, although
he was a genial, honorable, and kind-hearted man, he had, in early life, contracted habits
of dissipation, which clung to him through life, and which were very displeasing to his father.
He had been married a number of years, too, but had no children. The information of Mr. Kerr,
respecting the will of my husband's father, was anything but pleasing to him--for he loved
his brother, and had a very tender regard for his feelings--and as much as he valued the love
and approbation of his father, he could not enjoy it at the expense of his brother. He was
very much worried, and seemed scarcely to know what to do. Finally he repaired to the bedside
of his father, and, painful as it must have been to him, at such a time, he gently, but earnestly,
expostulated with him on the subject. The old gentleman, for some time, persisted in saying,
Joseph, you are my favorite son; you have a child, too; while Edward has none. I do not wish
my property to be squandered, or to go out of my family: but always received the reply, father,
you have but two children, do not, I beg you, make a difference between us, or something equivalent
to that. At length he prevailed, and his father had a codicil added to his will, which made
his brother an equal heir with himself, the property to come into their possession after the
death of their mother, and should these brothers die, leaving no heirs, the estate should belong
to his granddaughter, Eliza Wahrendorff. I am sure you will agree with me, dear boys, that
your grandfather was right, but how seldom do we see an exhibition of such firm integrity among
men, (even among brothers), of whom the poet truthfully says, "If self the wavering balance
shake, it's rarely right adjusted."

In the winter of 1836 my husband paid a visit to the eastern cities, for the purpose of purchasing
a stock of goods.  Previous to this I had always accompanied him, so that, excepting the time
he went for his sick brother, (Robert McCloud), to which I have alluded, we had never been
separated.  He was absent seven weeks, during which time he wrote me twenty-one letters, of
which I will quote one entire, and give a few extracts from others, that you may read from
his own pen.

"Steamboat Potosi, below Cincinnati, Jan. 1st, 1836.

"A happy new year to my dear Charlotte and to all my dear friends at home! I feel that I should
be happy to spend today with you, but though absent, still, in spirit, I am with you, for my
thoughts have dwelt all the morning with my dear friends in St. Louis.  We left Louisville
last night at seven o'clock and are now passing "Rising Sun," a village in Indiana, thirty-five
miles below Cincinnati, which we hope to reach by dinner time. I saw no one in Louisville that
we knew. Mr. B. was not there and I made no inquiries about his family, as I do not know his
partner, Mr. G., and we remained there but a few hours. I read, this morning, the 46th chapter
of Isaiah, and, from the fact of this being new year’s day, my mind has been carried to the
goodness of God to usward, in granting all the blessings we enjoy:--His infinite greatness,
wisdom and mercy. I feel greater reliance on the atonement of our divine Saviour, and a full
assurance that if we are faithful unto the end, we shall reap a crown of immortality and be
forever blessed by His presence. Let us then, dear Charlotte, endeavor to realize more than
we ever yet have done the reality of eternal things, and fix our minds more on the attainment
of the salvation, not only of our own souls, but of all those who are near and dear to us.
Let us "seek first the kingdom," feeling assured that all things else will be given us that
is best for us. I am satisfied that love to God will purify our souls, and make us better fitted
for the trials of this world, and will ensure eternal happiness to us hereafter.

"I send you a kiss, which you must share with our dear little girl, not forgetting aunt Loo's
share. When you write, let me know how the boys (my brothers Taylor and Wm.) get on at St.
Charles, and the news generally of all the family."

CINCINNATI.

"I have just called on Dr. Drake and family, and find them very pleasant people. We stay here
but a few hours, and leave for Wheeling, at 8 o'clock to-night. Remember me to mother, and
to all our dear friends at home. Yours truly, JOS. CHARLESS."

This is a very characteristic letter, and I will take occasion here to acknowledge, with shame,
that, with my ardent temperament, I was not always pleased with my husband's universal care,
and love, and consideration of everybody, without a stronger expression of his feelings for
me.  When he presented me with a set of pearls, before our marriage, he brought two sets for
me to select from, not being able himself to decide which was the prettiest.  As soon as I
expressed a preference, he handed that set to me, and the other to my sister, politely asking
her acceptance of it.  While I was pleased to see my sweet sister with a set of pearls, like
mine, I would have been more pleased with his attention if it had been directed to me only;
and often have I lost sight of his devotion to me--by every act of his life, not less in his
love to those most dear to me, than in thousands of other ways--because he did not make a more
marked difference in his acts, and bestow upon me, in words, a stronger expression of his love.

But I have lived long enough to find out what empty things words are: how poor and mean, compared
with a life which, like "a living epistle, is known and read of all men."

"A happy New Year to my dear C., and all my dear friend’s," etc. His was a courtesy which sprung
from the heart--which was seen alone with his wife in the cordial New Year's greeting, or at
the fireside, with familiar loved ones there; that came from his pen, or flew upon the telegraph;
a courtesy that carried soul with it, and made everyone feel the value of his friendship and
love; not that which is the result of false teaching, or a false heart--to be put on, or put
off, as it suits the place or the whim of its possessor.

But I promised to quote some extracts from other letters. Well, here is one: "I hope, dear
Charlotte, you have taken care of your health in my absence, and that I shall have the happiness
to see you yourself again. I pray the Lord to be merciful unto us, and grant that we may meet
again, and that our hearts may once more be raised, with our voices, around our family altar,
to Him who purchased us by His blood, and, as we hope, redeemed us unto a new life; and that
His blessing may extend to all who are near and dear to us; that all our family may be united
in serving the Lord fervently and affectionately."

Again he says: "I hope that, in the letters you have written, you have told me all about the
business of the store, and house, and farm, and generally all the news of home, as I will not
be able to receive an answer to this, or any of my subsequent letters from the east."

My husband made me his confidant. He did not think me so far beneath him as not to be able
to understand, and to appreciate all that interested him--his "business," his "farm.” At "the
house" he ever considered me the head, while he relieved me of every possible care, by strict
personal attention to all out-of-door work connected with housekeeping. This little farm to
which he refers was his delight; for it served as recreation from the toils of mercantile life,
and afforded him unalloyed pleasure. He was fond of flowers, of fruits, of trees, of meadows,
and everything pertaining to country life. It was impossible for him to stand and look at others
who were at work in the garden. He would throw off his coat, seize the spade or the hoe, and
go to work himself with the most intense relish. Not the most minute little wild flower ever
escaped his notice, or was ruthlessly trodden under foot; but, stooping down, he would take
up the tiny thing, and hold it up for admiration, seeming to think that others could not but
admire it as he did. Oh, my husband! how sweet and pure was your life! Tears fall as I think
of thee.

Before this period in the history of your grandfather, we had exchanged our old residence for
a very delightful one, near to his paternal home, on Market and Fifth streets. It had been
built by Mr. and Mrs. Wahrendorff, for their own use; had a large yard, and every improvement
necessary to make it second to none in the city. Here your dear mother passed seven years of
her happy childhood, and still remembers what romps she used to have with her papa; how she
would watch for him at the alley-gate, with hands full of snow-balls to pelt him with, and
how he would catch her up in his arms, kiss her cheeks, plunge them into the snowbank, and
then give her a fair chance to pay him back. She remembers what assistance he would render
her in the very grave business of catching pigeons, by creeping up behind them, and sprinkling
"a little fresh salt upon their tails." She has not forgotten the happy Christmas mornings,
when old Santa Claus was sure to load her with presents; nor her school-girl parties, which
would have been no parties at all without "papa" to make fun for them; and many other things,
perhaps, which I never knew, or noticed, she could tell you. But "grandma" remembers some things,
which, as she wants you to see "grandpa" just as he was, she will relate to you.

About this time, we had a dining-room waiter, who, one day, was such a luckless wight as to
be very impertinent to me. He was an "exquisite," (in his way), although as black as the "ace
of spades;" wore a stiff shirt collar, that looked snow-white, from the contrast, and combed
his hair so nicely that it appeared as fleecy as zephyr-worsted. He had, however, a habit of
going off, without anybody's knowing where, and staying a long time, neglecting his work, and
provoking "grandma." Upon his return, when she would inquire where he had been, his answer
invariably was, "To the barber’s, ma'am"--accompanied by a bow, and an odoriferous compound
of barbarous perfumes, presenting altogether such a ludicrous picture that I could not possibly
avoid laughing; after which, of course, I would have to excuse him, with the mild injunction
not to stay so long again. Anthony presumed upon this mode of treatment until it ceased to
be amusing to me, when, with a good grace, I was enabled to administer a severe reproof, which
he returned with the most unheard-of impudence. As soon as his master came in, I related the
fact to him. In an instant, as Anthony was passing the dining-room door, my husband sprang
at him--caught him by the collar, shook and twirled him around into the gallery, and pounded
him with his bare fists to his heart's content. In this changing world, I do not know but that,
in the course of time, you little Southerners may become fanatical abolitionists, and, losing
sight, in the above case, of the cause of provocation, in your tenderness and sympathy for
the slave, will attribute this unceremonious treatment of poor Anthony to the fact that he
was one of those "colored unfortunates." Therefore, to set you right, at least, with regard
to the character of your grandfather, I will give you another instance of his impulsiveness,
which, perhaps, may be considered a flaw in the character of this singularly pure and noble man.

Some years after the circumstance related above, a young friend was living with us who had
a hired white girl for a nurse. I soon discovered that she was an unprincipled, saucy girl;
but she was smart enough to get on the "blind side" of this young mother, by nursing the babe
(as she thought) admirably well. When I could no longer put up with her encroachments, I took
the girl to one side, and laid down the law; whereupon the enraged creature was excessively
impertinent. After finding that my dear little friend had not the moral courage to dismiss
the girl (which she might have done, for I offered to take care of the baby myself until another
could be procured), I suppressed my emotions, and bore it as well as I could. From reasons
of consideration for my husband, who seemed much wearied that evening after returning home
from business, I concluded not to consult him about what was best to be done until next morning,
when, upon hearing the particulars of this little episode in domestic life, he arose in great
haste, and so excited as scarcely to be able to get into his clothes. I begged him to be calm,
but there was no calmness for him until he got hold of the girl, ran her down two flights of
stairs, and out of the door into the street, having ordered her, in no very measured terms,
never again to cross his threshold.

In the course of his whole life, I witnessed but one (or perhaps two) other instances of like
impetuosity. They were rare, indeed, and always immediately followed, as in the cases above
referred to, by his usual calmness and good humor, no trace being left of the storm within,
save a subdued smile, which had in it more of shame than triumph. I have been told that, in
his counting-room, he has occasionally produced a sensation by like demonstrations, caused,
in every case, by the entrance of some person who, not knowing the stuff he was made of, would
venture to make an attack upon the character of some friend of his; or, perhaps, would make
a few insidious remarks, "just to put Mr. Charless on his guard." But the slanderous intruder
would soon find out the quicker he was outside of the store the better for him, much to the
astonishment, and amusement, too, of his partners and clerks, who, but for those rare flashes
of temper, and an occasional "stirring up" of a milder sort among the boys in the store, could
not be made to believe it possible that Mr. Charless could be otherwise than mild and genial
as a sunbeam.

He was never known to resent, in this kind of way, any indignity shown to himself, which was
rarely done by any one. Unfortunately, however, on one occasion, he gained the displeasure
of an Irishman, (from whom he had borrowed some money), who was half lawyer, half money-broker.
Standing with a group of gentlemen, in conversation about money matters, per centage, etc.,
your grandfather remarked that he had borrowed a certain amount from Mr. M., for a certain
per cent., (naming it). One of the gentlemen asked, "Are you sure, Mr. Charless? for that was
my money Mr. M. lent you, and he informed me that you were to pay him only so much," (naming
the per cent., which happened to be less than that agreed upon).  Mr. Charless, perceiving
his faux pas, expressed a regret that he had so unwittingly mentioned what, it seemed, should
have been kept secret; which was all he could do. Mr. M., of course, heard of it. He knew well
that he could not revenge himself upon him who was the innocent cause of his exposure, in St.
Louis; but in New York, where neither were so well known, he did all he could to injure Mr.
Charless' reputation. The friends of the latter, having heard of Mr. M.'s unprincipled conduct,
in insidiously striving to undermine the confidence reposed in him there, informed him of it,
expecting that he would take some notice of the matter--which he did not do.  They came again,
and protested against his allowing “that fellow” to continue these aspersions.  He smiled,
and replied, “I am not afraid of his doing me any harm; let him go on.”  He did go on, and
after awhile he returned to St. Louis, when some mutual friend (poor Mr. M. still had friends
among gentlemen) informed him that certain reports against Mr. Charless, which had reached
St. Louis, as coming from him, were doing him considerable injury; not Mr. C, for he stood
too high in the estimation of the community to be injured by slanderous reports of any kind
whatever.  Whereupon Mr. M. denied having made them, and expressed a determination to explain,
and make the matter all right with Mr. Charless.  For this purpose, one day, as the latter
was passing a livery stable, where Mr. M. was waiting for his buggy to be brought out, he called
to Mr. Charless, who passed along without noticing him.  Again he called saying, “Mr. Charless,
I want to speak to you.”  Mr. Charless waved his hand back at him, and went on. Elevating his
voice, said he, “Do you refuse to speak to me, sir?” Still a wave of the hand-–nothing more.
This was too much for the hot-headed gentleman.  His raving and abuse attracted the attention
of everybody about there to the hand, which still waved, as “grandpa” walked on, and said,
too plainly to be mistaken, in its silent contempt, “ I can’t lower myself by speaking to such
a dirty fellow as you are.”

Without a word or circumstance from your grandfather, it circulated from mouth to mouth, with
considerable gusto; from which, I need not say, Mr. M. had the worst of it.

It has given me some pain, my dear children, to speak of these incidents; and, indeed, there
are many things (some very sweet to me) that I feel constrained to write which I would gladly
keep secret and sacred in my soul, but for a firm conviction that such a halo of light as has
shone about my path, from the pure life of your beloved grandfather, should not be allowed
to go out.  And the faithful historian cannot give the light without the shadows.

Affectionately yours, GRANDMA.

Belmont, February, 1861.

Letter Nine

My Dear Grandchildren:

Before the fire companies were properly organized in St. Louis, or, perhaps, before there were
any at all, I was perfectly miserable whenever a fire occurred, for “grandpa” would be sure
to rush to the spot, and up, probably, to the most dangerous places on the tops of houses,
or anywhere else, to assist in protecting life or property. Besides the fear that he might
lose his life in this way, I felt considerable anxiety on account of his health; for, after
these extraordinary exertions, he would return home nearly exhausted.  No entreaties or arguments,
in urging him to desist, had any weight, until he found that his services were no longer needed.

With this impetuosity of character, he possessed a large share of moral courage.  He dared
to do right, or what he deemed right, always, and that without display or fear, and entirely
indifferent to the opinion of the world.  With a modest estimate of himself was blended a quiet
satisfaction in the discharge of duty.  But not over-careful about what others did or did not
do, or at all dictatorial, he cheerfully accorded to all what he claimed for himself, viz:
independence of thought and action.  No one was more willing to give advice, when asked; none
more free from obtruding it uninvited. Thankfully and courteously he always received it, even
when pressed upon him beyond what was proper; and although to some of it he might not give
a second thought, perceiving at once its invalidity; yet he was too modest, and too polite
to intimate the fact–-leaving an impression upon the mind of the giver (without the slightest
intention to deceive) that he had conferred a favor: which, indeed, by considering the kindness
of the motive, he appreciated as such.  This was the result of a profound respect for the opinions
and feelings of his fellow-men, to whom he would listen patiently, even to the ignorant and
the weak, meanwhile giving kind and considerate responses, causing them (no less than his equals)
to feel satisfied with themselves and with him, whom each one, high and low, rich and poor,
esteemed as his own particular friend: and all this without study, without an effort, because
the offspring of a kind, generous, and appreciative nature.

A circumstance occurs to my mind, which, perhaps will give you an idea of your grandfather’s
kindness and consideration towards those in the humbler walks of life:  One morning a plain,
honest looking youth, from whom he had purchased some marketing, accompanied him to the house,
for the purpose of bringing it.  They went into the kitchen together, to warm and dry themselves,
and when, in a few moments afterwards, breakfast was announced, “grandpa” asked me to have
a plate placed for the lad; to which I demurred, inquiring if I had not better send breakfast
to the kitchen for him?  He replied, “No. The golden rule directs us to do unto others as we
would they should do unto us.” Whereupon an argument ensued, I insisting that, according to
that rule, his breakfast should be sent out, as I had no doubt that the boy would feel more
at ease, and would enjoy his breakfast more in the kitchen than he would at our table.  Fixing
his eyes upon me, with that kind but reproving expression which was characteristic of him,
he said: “Charlotte, if we were to stop at the house of that young man’s father, I doubt not
but that he would give us the best place, and the best of everything he has.” Even this did
not convince me; when, with his usual dislike to argument, and with that conciliatory kindness
which ever marked his intercourse with his family, he yielded the point, gracefully, as though
it was a matter of little consequence, so that the young man was only well provided for; but
not without a mild, and well-merited reproof, in which he playfully reminded me of my “Virginia
pride.”

And thus it ever was, my dear children, with your honored grandfather.  Firm in principle–-kind
in action; but most kind to those who had the first and highest claim upon him.  Never afraid
of compromising his dignity or position as head of his family, he always retained it unabated.
How unlike some men, who, by attempting to maintain their rights by an overbearing, arbitrary
manner, and harsh and unbecoming words, evince a weakness which makes them contemptible, if
not in the estimation of the wife and children, at least so in that of others, who plainly
discern that littleness, in some shape or other, and not manly dignity and good sense, places
them in their unenviable position of “master of my own house.”

And yet how much do I regret, now, when it is too late to remedy it, that I did not, readily
and cheerfully, accede to every wish of this dear friend, whose truly consistent and beautiful
character shone out most clearly at home.  How much do I regret now, that I should have allowed
his few little foibles to annoy me.  The greatest of these, and the one that caused more unpleasant
words between us than any and all things else, was his carelessness in dress.  I do not know
that I am scrupulously neat, but I did pride myself in the personal appearance of my husband,
which was sometimes seriously marred by an unshaved beard or a soiled shirt.  We were once
traveling on a steamboat, and, standing on the guards, I discovered him on the wheel-house,
and called to him to come to me.  A lady asked if “that old gentleman” was my husband, and
said: “You look so young, I am surprised that you should have married so old a man.”  She seemed
to be an unoffending, simple-hearted woman, such as we frequently meet in traveling, and I
replied, with a smile, “He suits me very well, ma’am;” but made use of the earliest opportunity
to tell him of it–-really taking pleasure in doing so-–for I had often expressed my own views
on that subject, assuring him that he looked at least twenty years older when he neglected
to dress with care, especially if he had not shaved.

Next morning he paid particular attention to making his toilet, declaring it to be his intention
“to create a sensation,” which he certainly succeeded in doing, much to our mutual amusement;
for the same lady, eyeing him closely at breakfast; expressed to me afterwards her amazement
at the change, giving it as her opinion, that “he was the handsomest young gentleman she had
ever seen.”

I went too boldly to work in trying to correct his careless habits in dress.  I formed an idea
that it was my duty and my privilege, not only to attend to my husband’s wardrobe, but to direct,
too, how it should be disposed of; but soon found that he was not to be made to do anything.
And, as “straws show which way the wind blows,” I learned, in most things, to influence him
by silken cords.  He was willing to be led captive by love and tenderness.  Why, when your
dear mamma was not more than four or five years of age, she had learned the art of making “papa”
do as she liked.  I remember to have heard her say once (slyly to one side), “I am going to
make papa let me do it.”  And when asked “Make papa?” answered, “Yes, the way mamma does;”
and immediately turned to him with her most bewitching little smile, and said, “Do please,
dear papa, let me.”

O! what a joyous home we had! And what changes time has made! The old Wahrendorff house has
been rased to the ground, and stores stand in its place.  Where domestic peace and happiness
reigned-–where flowers bloomed-–where childhood held its sports and holidays, now is seen the
busy mart of this bustling, plodding world.  The merry little magnet of that grass-covered
spot is now the mother of four children; and the beloved father, upon whom her mother fondly
hoped to lean, as she tottered down the hill of life, lies low, at its base.

One of my dear sisters was there seen in her bridals robes, pure and sweet.  But now, she is
among the angels (as I humbly trust,) clothed in the white robe of a Saviour’s righteousness.
The other still lives to bless us with her presence and her love.

Our brothers have passed their truant school-boy days-–“sowed their wild oats”–-have taken
their stand among men, and are realizing themselves now the blessedness of a home of conjugal
and paternal happiness, and begin to know something of the care and anxiety that has been felt
for them, and of the hopes which stimulate to duty.  And thus, Time, as he passes, leaves foot-prints,
which make the children of to-day the men and women of to-morrow; brings changes which blight
our fondest hopes, crush the heart, and leave us, in our tempest-tossed bark, to weather awhile
longer the storms upon the voyage of life.

But my mind still reverts to this home of my happy married life. It is Sabbath morning there,
and we are around the family altar.  The chapter has been read, and we are singing a favorite
hymn of the one who reads and prays.  It is spring time, and the fresh air comes in through
the opened window, perfumed with the rose and the sweet-brier. But we are singing:

“The rosy light is dawning, Upon the mountain’s brow: It is the Sabbath morning, Arise, and
pay thy vow. Lift up thy voice to Heaven, In sacred praise and prayer, While unto thee is given
The light of life to share.

The landscape, lately shrouded By evening’s paler ray, Smiles beauteous and unclouded Before
the eye of day; So let our souls, benighted Too long in folly’s shade, By the kind smiles be
lighted To joys that never fade.

O, see those waters streaming In crystal purity; While earth, with verdure teeming, Give rapture
to the eye. Let rivers of salvation In larger currents flow, Till every tribe and nation Their
healing virtue know.”

The morning is past–-we have been to church, and dined; and now our little daughter is listening,
most eagerly, to the Bible story, which was promised her as a reward for good behavior.

The afternoon has passed.  We have had an early tea, and again we surround the Throne of Grace
before going to church.  The same loved voice is heard again joining in another favorite hymn:

“Sweet is the light of Sabbath eve, And soft the sunbeams lingering there: For this blest hour
the world I leave, Wafted on wings of faith and prayer.

The time, how lovely, and how still! Peace shines and smiles on all below; The vale, the wood,
the stream, the hill, All fair with evening’s setting glow.

Season of rest, the tranquil soul Feels the sweet calm, and melts to love: And while these
peaceful moments roll, Faith sees a smiling Heaven above.

Nor shall our days of toil be long; Our pilgrimage will soon be trod, And we shall join the
ceaseless song, The endless Sabbath of our God.”

Affectionately yours, GRANDMA.

Belmont, February, 1861.

Letter Ten

My Dear Grandchildren:

I see in casting a glance back, that I have passed over a good deal in the life of your grandfather,
which will, perhaps, be of interest to you; without which, at any rate, this sketch would not
be complete.  And I intended, when I closed my last letter, to commence this with his career
as a business man, and to continue the narrative to the close of his life; and then to give
you a distinct account of his influence and deeds in the Church, and in the world, as a Christian.
But I do not know, upon further reflection, that it is best to divide up his life in that way;
and, indeed, it seems to me rather a difficult and unnatural task to do so, for he strictly
followed the injunction of the Apostle: “Be diligent in business, fervent in spirit, serving
the Lord.”  The dividing line, therefore, would be hard to find, if there was one at all.

And these letters, which are a pleasant recreation to me while I write them–-and of profit,
too, I hope, as I carefully review the life of him who, “though dead, still speaketh”–-would,
I fear, become a task, should I change the simple and pleasing plan I have adopted of recalling
the past, with the incidents as they occurred, and from them selecting such as I think will
best unfold to your view the real, every-day life of him, which, if fairly seen, cannot fail
to plant in your young hearts a just pride for such an ancestor, and a holy desire to walk
in his steps.  With this view, I will retrace, and bring up, briefly and in order, the omissions
to which I have alluded.

You remember, I mentioned to you the fact, that your grandfather commenced life, as a business
man, by becoming the partner of his father in the drug business.  His father had, a few years
previously, given up his interest in the “Missouri Republican” to his son Edward, and commenced
a business which was new to him, and that upon a small capital.  He found it so profitable,
however, that he prevailed on Joseph to abandon his profession, (the practice of which he had
but just commenced), and to join him, believing that it would ultimately be more to his advantage
to do so.  From the profits arising from this business–-which regularly increased, with the
increase of the city, and that of the country, from the rapid emigration to the Western States-–combined
with his success in an occasional speculation in land, I doubt not, if “grandpa” had been at
all given to the love of money, or had been ambitious of attaining to great wealth, and had
bent his powers of mind and body in that direction, he would have reached the desired goal,
perhaps to becoming a millionaire.

But very different from this were the tendencies of his nature. He appreciated money as the
means of adding to the sum of human happiness; and, while he was by no means reckless in the
use of it, it was a source of great pleasure to him to have it in his power to indulge his
family in having what they desired and in living as they pleased, and still to have something
over to distribute to the necessities of the indigent.  To the Church of Christ he cheerfully
contributed to the extent of his ability, esteeming it one of his highest privileges.  Pursuing
this course, his business meanwhile widening, and constantly becoming more profitable, in the
year 1837 or ’38, he decided to take a partner, and offered the situation to my brother Henry,
which was gladly accepted.  After this, (I do not know exactly how long), he purchased a valuable
piece of ground in the city, upon a part of which “the firm” determined to build an oil and
lead factory.  This proved to be a very expensive and arduous undertaking; and, although it
promised, after being fairly established, to be a most profitable investment, yet the capital
of “the firm” was not sufficient to complete and to carry it on successfully until it should
reach a self-sustaining point, without doing serious injury to “the store,” by depriving it
of the necessary capital for its success.

During this state of things, which grew worse every day, my husband discerned a portentous
cloud in the sky of his commercial prosperity, which resulted after days and nights of anxiety
and overtaxed strength of body and mind, in a low state of health and spirits that almost unfitted
him for his accumulated business, which, nevertheless, he continued to prosecute with avidity.
This was about the year 1841.  I do not recollect how long his ill health lasted, but I well
remember how his flesh went away–-how pale he was–-how he perspired at night, from nervous
prostration, and how his skin seemed to cleave to his bones.  He was still amiable and uncomplaining;
but his elasticity, his free-hearted joyousness was gone.

After pressing him for some time to tell me his troubles and difficulties, and sympathizing
with him because of them, until a far deeper concern took possession of me on account of his
health, and, finding that moderate expostulations did not better things, I determined to make
an effort by trying a wife’s skill in arousing him from this state of despondency, which threatened
such serious consequences; for I might well feel that fortune would be nothing to me without
my husband-–my husband as he ever had been.  And “if the worst came to the worst,” if he only
had sufficient means to pay his debts, (which he said, without doubt, he had), I cared for
nothing better than to begin life afresh, with such a husband as I had, with health, youth,
business capacity, and a good reputation.

This conversation was not without effect; and he determined, by way of recruiting, to “knock
off” from business, and to make an excursion into the country.  This little trip–-which was
not simply without aim, other than for his health, as he had some business to attend to on
the way-–acted like a charm, by restoring his wasted energies and his cheerfulness.  He returned,
in ten or fifteen days, more like himself than he had been for months.  After this, he soon
recovered entirely; and never again did he lose his equanimity for more, perhaps, than a day
or two at a time, although the dreaded blow did come, but not before he had taken a step in
the divine life, which served to buoy him up above the ills of this checkered existence.

During the year 1839, about five years after we became members of the Church, your grandfather
was ordained “Ruling Elder” in the Second Presbyterian church.  We united with the “First Presbyterian
church” (which I believe, I told you in a previous letter), which was then the only one in
the city, but were induced, from a sense of duty, to go out, with a few others, to assist in
strengthening a small colony that had been struggling for existence almost from the time it
had left the mother church, some two or three years previous.  In the building up of this church
he was one of its most efficient agents.  Besides having the duties of an Elder to perform,
he was appointed a Trustee, and, with others, was very active in planning, and carrying forward
to its completion, a large and expensive building, bearing a heavy part of the debt of it for
years, until the means were provided for his relief, which was not until long after he had
met with heavy pecuniary losses. He was regularly in his place at all the meetings of the church,
both for spiritual and secular purposes.

Now, my dear children, if you have conceived an idea, from the insight I have given you, of
the numerous occupations of your grandfather, that he must have been bustling about, having
so much to do--hurrying things at home, and having no time for pleasure or recreation-–you
are greatly mistaken.  A day rarely passed that he did not take a ride with his family, or
some member of it, to “the farm,” (except during the period of his ill health, when he oftener
sought repose in the afternoon), enjoying, with the fresh air, exercise, and charms of the
country, the society of those so dear to him.  He never came home with a surly look–-like some
people who want to make an impression that they have the world on their shoulders-–to talk
about hard work, and hard times, or disagreeable matters, or to recount all the wonderful things
he had done, or had to do.  But, with a step and a countenance that seemed to say, “What a
blessed and happy man I am!” his presence always brought with it happiness and peace.  He was
not a great talker, but he generally had something pleasant to say, or an interesting anecdote
to relate; for, with a keen perception of the ludicrous, he possessed a talent for telling
anecdotes admirably well, and a humor that was irresistibly pervasive.  No one could help feeling
its influence, and being all the happier for it.

I wish I could remember some of his anecdotes, and do them justice in the relation; but I know
the attempt would be futile: for there was so much in the look and manner that gave a zest
to his conversation, and rendered it attractive, that it would be impossible to convey a correct
idea of it in words.  None can feel, or fully appreciate it, without having had the privilege
of being in his presence.  A friend, to whom he was much attached, and at whose house he frequently
visited, mentioned to me, since his death, that he and his wife had, from their early acquaintance
with him, been in the habit of referring often to what “Mr. Charless” would say, recalling
his conversation, and talking so much about him, that one day he asked, “Wife, how is it we
cannot help talking of Mr. Charless?–-what is there about him that impresses us so?  It is
not really what he says, but the way he says it.  It is his humor, his benevolence of manner,
his inimitable pleasantry, etc.”

With these qualities, I need not say that he was an acquisition to society.  He enjoyed it
at home or abroad; at the evening party, or with a few friends around the social board.  With
a genial nature, he had a facility for adaptation, so that it was easy for him to feel perfectly
at home, and unrestrained, with all classes and conditions of men, young or old, gay or grave.
He was particularly fond of young people, and generally had a “little sweetheart” among the
girls, with whom he would occasionally carry on a spirited flirtation.

In the fall of 1841, immediately after his period of dejection, and consequent ill health,
your grandfather and myself mutually agreed that it would be best for us, by way of lessening
our expenses, to sell our furniture, and break up housekeeping for a few years.  My health,
which had never been good since that severe illness, of which I have spoken, was the palpable
cause; for my husband had often expressed a desire to try the effect of rest from the cares
and fatigue of housekeeping, and now, that one sister and two of my brothers were married and
settled, there was not difficulty in the way of our doing so.  This proved to be a very fortunate
step, for at the time things, almost anything, sold well.  The city was prosperous, and everybody
felt rich.  Our furniture, of which we reserved sufficient to furnish two bed-rooms, besides
our valuables of plate, etc., sold for as much, some of it for more, than we paid for it when
new.  And in one year from that time, suddenly, there was a monetary pressure, which brought
every kind of property down to less than half of its value or original cost.  It was one of
those pecuniary tornadoes which occasionally sweep through the whole length and breadth of
the land, levelling and blighting everything as it passes, putting a stop to the wheels of
commerce, and bringing terror into almost every family.  It came with an astounding effect
upon St. Louis.  Many who felt themselves rich were in a few days reduced to a state of poverty,
not having the means wherewith to pay their honest debts.

The firm of “Charless & Blow” were compelled to “suspend payment.”  This reverse came upon
them like a shock, for, notwithstanding my husband’s fears, a year or two previous, with regard
to his mercantile affairs, he had informed me, but a short time before, that he had no doubt
now but that they would be enabled to get through with the difficulties that had been pressing
him down; for, as he expressed it, “we begin now to see our way clear.”  They had had no apprehensions
with regard to their endorser (for whom they also endorsed), for “his house” was one of the
oldest and (it was thought) one of the most opulent in the city.  But when the fact was known
that Mr. T had failed, and when his creditors called upon the firm of “Charless & Blow” to
respond to his notes, which were then due, it was too much for them.  At first my husband (pale
from emotion) thought all was over!–-all for which he had been toiling for years; reduced to
poverty, his reputation as a merchant, perhaps, greatly weakened; and, what was worse still,
(not knowing the extent of his losses by Mr. T.), he might not be able, after sacrificing everything
he had in the world, to pay his debts!

In a crisis like this, developments are exceedingly rapid, and revulsion of feeling just as
much so.  The excitement is too intense to endure delay.  The best and the worst must be known,
if possible, and that at once.  It was soon ascertained, therefore, in the case of “Charless
& Blow,” that their loss, by the failure of our good and honorable old friend, was not much;
and the chief difficulty with them, as with all other sufferers, lay in the loss of confidence
between men, and the consequent scarcity of money in circulation.

Your grandparents passed one troubled night in consequence of this event, in which sleep–-“tired
nature’s sweet restorer”-–forsook them.  But the next afternoon found them taking a drive in
grandpa’s buggy, calmly talking about their new circumstances, and resolving, with a courageous
heart, to meet them, whatever they might be.  Of course, I did all I could to encourage him,
(else I would not have been worthy the name of wife); became very self-sacrificing for a lady–-willing
to part with my tea service, and all my silver-ware-–any and everything I had of value, except
my bridal gifts; and then began to speculate upon how very nice it would be to live in a neat
little cottage, etc., etc.  For I was not too old to be romantic; and I do really believe now,
as I recall my enthusiasm on the subject, that I would have been disappointed had anything
occurred to prevent me from exhibiting to my husband how cheerfully I could submit to misfortune.
No such test came; for the very next day a widow, who had deposited a few hundred dollars with
“the firm” for safe keeping, hearing of their reverses, called to get her money.  They had
none; and my husband, remembering my offer, sent a messenger, with a note, requesting me to
send the tea-service, with which to secure her.  Cheerfully–-for I was glad it was in my power
to secure the widow against loss, and to relieve the mind of my husband to some little extent-–but
with a beating heart, (for this was a birth-day gift from him), I parted with my beautiful
tea-service, and have never seen it since.  It was sold to pay that debt.

Our dear old mother was greatly afflicted because of our reverses in fortune, and wept like
a child; but her amazement was to see me so unmoved.  I thought then it was Christian submission
that enabled me to bear up so well; but I see now there was a great deal of human love, and
sympathy, and human pride, too, mixed with it.

Although we were not keeping house, at that time, we were very delightfully and happily situated,
for we were boarding (as an especial favor) at our eldest brother’s.  He had a sweet wife,
and they lived in their beautiful new house, which, years after, “grandpa” purchased.  It was
there your dear mamma passed her young lady days-–where she was married-–where her little sons,
Charless, Louis and Edward, were born; and where their loving grandpa breathed away his precious
life.  But the same reasons which made it necessary for us to submit to loss and inconvenience,
made it incumbent on my brother to sell his residence. Consequently, we accepted the kind invitation
of our mother to occupy a part of her house; and, by strict economy in every practicable thing
-–paying her a very low price for our board, which the old lady would receive, but “not a cent
more”-–we passed three of the happy years of our life, at the end of which time, we had regained
a considerable amount of our losses; and, what was better still, your dear grandfather had
become firmly and prosperously re-established in business, without having lost an atom of his
reputation as a judicious and energetic merchant.

“The suspension” of Charless & Blow did not result in a complete failure, by any means.  They
solicited an examination into their affairs, exhibited their books, making a complete and full
exposition of the condition of their business, and it was unanimously agreed upon, by the committee
chosen for the purpose, that it would be greatly to the advantage of their creditors for “the
firm” not to close up, but to continue the business, each binding himself to extract, for the
two succeeding years, only a small (stated) sum for private use, from the proceeds of the store.

As soon as the adverse condition of “C. & B.” was relieved, and they had regained their former
position-–which, I think, was in about two years from the time of the crisis-–they made up
their minds to dissolve partnership: one to take “the store;” the other, “the oil and lead
factory.”  Accordingly, terms of dissolution were drawn up.  Mr. Charless, being the elder,
had the privilege of choosing, and, after reflection, decided upon retaining the store.  My
two younger brothers afterwards became his partner in the business, and remained as “Charless,
Blow & Co.” until dissolved by the death of their beloved senior.

This is a long letter, my dear children, and I will close it, with the promise of letting you
know something more about our three years’ sojourn at your great-grandmamma’s: in which I hope
to show you how happy we can be under adverse circumstances, and how much less the evil of
“coming down in the world” is, than generally is supposed.

Affectionately yours, GRANDMA.

Letter Eleven

My Dear Grandchildren:

Man is naturally aspiring, and the more he attains to in life, the more earnestly he reaches
after something higher still.  And it is well that it is so, for, without this spirit, there
would necessarily be but little or no advance in the world.  The old land-marks would stand
unmolested, forever; and the human family, instead of developing, could not but deteriorate,
from generation to generation.  But for the fall of man, his highest aim would have been such
as the angels have, viz: to see, and to be with God, whose exceeding greatness and glory would
tend to ravish the soul with delight, enlarge its capacity, and yet keep it at an humble distance,
reverent and lowly.  But I am stepping beyond my reach, and will come back again to what is,
not what might have been.

As soon as you observe at all, you must perceive what a constant struggle there is going on
here below.  Some aim at “fortune’s gaudy show,” while others strive to catch the wreath of
fame, and crown themselves with that.  Few are so indifferent, unless besotted by ignorance
and degradation, as not to aspire, in some shape or other, to something more or better than
they ever had, or better than others have; and, in this age of the world-–at any rate in this
country-–money seems to be esteemed the chief good.  Not the miser’s money, for, while that
is locked up, and he hoards, and hoards, and still locks it up, it narrows down the soul, and
expunges from it all the milk of human kindness.  What are the orphan’s tears, or the widow’s
groans–-what is human suffering to him?  Gold! gold!  His precious gold fills the contracted,
dark place, which the soul, made in the image of its Creator, has forsaken, and leaves him
more brute than man.

Money is a good and valuable possession, but not to the spendthrift, to whom it becomes a temptation
to vice.  Better be poor forever, and, by the sweat of the brow, eat your daily bread, maintaining,
at the same time, a pure and unblemished character, than to have a fortune that only induces
idleness and self-indulgence, opening to you an avenue for the destruction of soul and body;
and, perhaps, too, as is often the case, cause you to blindly drag your wife and children with
you, if not to vice, at least to want and to disgrace. The analogy can scarcely hold farther than
in a parterre; and even there very imperfectly. Mason could not hear to see his own system pushed
to that excess into which it naturally led; and bitterly resented the attempts made by the
advocates of the picturesque, to introduce into his landscapes more factitious wildness than he
intended.

In 1783 he published a Translation from the Latin of Du Fresnoy's
Art of Painting, in which the precepts are more capable of being reduced
to practice.  “The poor ye have always with you”-–why if not to keep the stream of benevolence running
fresh and sweet?  And money helps materially, perhaps too much, toward giving one position
in society.  All things considered, it is hard to lose it.  It is trying to feel, as you pass
along, people are saying, “There goes poor Mrs. A., or B.  She has come down in the world!”
Some malicious ones will say, “Well, she deserved it, for she was very extravagant, and she
held her head too high.”  Women, no doubt, are more susceptible to suffering and mortification,
from reverses in fortune than men are; yet there are many ways in which they feel it, too-–according
to their characters and dispositions.  And, my dear children, if I were to say that we had
not felt or cared for the reverses in life of which I told you in my last letter, it would
not be true.  We did feel it, and that in many ways.  My husband was humbled, and disappointed,
but entirely submissive to the will of God; for he believed that adversity, as well as prosperity,
came from His loving hand, and was designed for the highest good of His people.  Instead of
having the effect to lessen, it strengthened his faith.  Instead of making him more anxious
and striving for the accumulation of wealth, he was less so; and he continued to be less so
throughout the remainder of his life. Notwithstanding he was quite as industrious, just as
energetic; yet there was less of dross mixed up with the pure metal in his soul.  To me, it
was evident that he advanced rapidly in the divine life; of which I felt the influence, if
I caught none of its spirit.

In a letter from him, dated that fall, soon after our removal to his mother’s, he says: “The
scenery of the Mississippi, from the rapids north, is very beautiful.  The frost having changed
the color of part of the leaves, the forest presents an endless variety of colors; and the
great number of farms and villages add much to the beauty of the landscape.  But everywhere
I find the people complaining, and many suffering from actual want.  Although Providence has
provided a most bountiful harvest, many, who have been accustomed to have every comfort, and
many luxuries, around them, are now almost destitute.  It makes me feel more resigned to our
losses and poverty, seeing we are so much better off than thousands who are more deserving
than we.  They, it seems, are resigned, and submit most cheerfully to all the dispensations
of their Heavenly Father.  Let us, dear Charlotte, hereafter endeavor to show, in our lives,
greater devotedness to Him who has done so much for us, and who promises to be our support
and stay in every hour of need; who will never desert any who put their trust in Him.

“Let us, therefore, exhort one another, and provoke each other to well-doing, in the service
of our God.  Let us love each other more and more, and make Jesus the great object of our praise
and prayer.  I hope and pray that the chastenings of our blessed Lord, in depriving us of our
worldly possessions, may be sanctified to us, and lead us, more earnestly and undoubtingly,
to seek for possessions in that Kingdom where all is joy, and peace, and love.  Oh! That we
may be enabled, with all our dear kith and kin, and kind friends, to attain unto this glorious
and happy state, to dwell forever in the presence of our God, and enjoy Him throughout eternity.
Dear C., are not these things worth our most strenuous efforts?  And yet how little do we do!
How poor our best attempts to serve Him who has done everything for us.”

With these earnest desires for closer communion with God, and for those treasures which fade
not away, he necessarily had a hard struggle to prosecute his worldly affairs, under circumstances
so disadvantageous as that of carrying on a large business without the necessary capital, greatly
weakened, in fact, by pecuniary losses, and more still by the misfortune of being compelled
to “suspend payment,” and the consequent exposure of the internal difficulties with which “the
firm” had to contend.  Anxious and toiling, week after week, he was always rejoiced when Saturday
night came, that he might, as he generally expressed it in his prayer that night, “lay aside
the world, and engage in the delightful exercises of the holy Sabbath.”  And I will here mention,
for the benefit of those among you (if there are any such) who, in your eager pursuit of wealth,
or honor, or are battling, as he was, with the untoward events of life, are tempted to desecrate
the Sabbath to secular purposes, that I have often heard your grandfather say (about that time)
that on Monday his mind was clearer, and his hopes stronger of success, than at any other time.
And towards the close of the week, after his mental energies had been on the stretch for days,
things looked darker; that sometimes he felt as though he must give up; that it would be impossible
to meet his payments; but that on Monday, with both mind and body invigorated from the holy
rest of the Sabbath day, the mists had cleared away, and everything looked bright again-–so
bright that he often felt surprised that he should have been in such a desponding condition
on Saturday.

There is sound philosophy in this; but I will leave it for you to work out the problem, and
will proceed to say, that with the opening of the spring of 1843, business prospects really
did brighten.  And our new home, though humble, we had found vastly comfortable.  It looked
familiar and home-like, too; for the furniture to which we had been accustomed had been removed
into our suite of rooms, one of the bedsteads minus only the cornice and the feet, which had
to be taken off to accommodate it to the height of the ceiling-–of which, for awhile, I had
so constant and disagreeable an impression that often, when rising suddenly from my chair,
I would dodge, from fear of bumping my head against it.  And no wonder! For this was an old
house, built in “the year one,” before people (poor things!) found out the necessity of having
their ceilings pitched so high above them!  But our front room was otherwise capacious; for
several partitions had been knocked down, which added a small room and part of a hall to the
main one, and extended it entirely across the front of the house.  It was so large that it
accommodated the piano, and a pier-stand, besides every necessary article for a completely
furnished bed-room.  The piano and pier-stand-–the latter of which was a particular object
of attraction to your mamma (for bon-bons were kept in that)-–gave to the room the air somewhat
of a parlor.  At least, we esteemed it so cosy, and appropriate for the purpose, that we more
frequently received the calls of friends there than in our mother’s little reception-room.

What right had we to murmur?  It would have been ungrateful if we had done so; for, although
not by any means elegant, we were comfortable.  True, my nice carriage and beautiful horses
had been sold; but mother had quite a nice little carriage, and a fine old gray horse, that
would have appeared very respectable, if (as the stable boy said) the calves had not “chawed
of his tail!”  However, that was a source of amusement.  We rode often, for both mother and
I needed the exercise; and the rides were delightful, as ‘Joseph’ was generally our driver;
and a merry chase he would lead us sometimes, for when he no longer had “the farm” to go to,
(that had likewise been sold), he seemed determined to find out the merits, or demerits, of
every road in the vicinity.  This made quite a variety for us, for, besides the change of scenery,
it usually called forth ejaculations from his mother, and answers from him, which were very
amusing.  She saw no sense in ”rambling the country over, going into every nook and corner,
and jolting people to death!”  But he would earnestly assure her that he had not gone into
half yet-–looking round at her with a provokingly mischievous expression, which seemed to intimate
that he meant to try it, though-–and as for the roads, he could “find much worse roads than
that!  And as to driving–-he hadn’t begun to show how many stumps he could go over, without
upsetting.”  This playful, jocose, merry mood of her son, frequently recalled to the old lady’s
mind some incidents of early times, when she was young, and Joseph was a boy, which she would
relate, and laugh all over at, shaking her fat sides most merrily. And, notwithstanding her
outbursts of hastily spoken words of disapprobation to him for his temerity, she always wondered,
after being safely landed at home, why she enjoyed her rides so much more when Joseph drove!

When we think about it, there are really no enjoyments in this wide world equal to home enjoyments.
And when we have to go away from that hallowed spot, to seek for some longing of the soul which
we cannot find there, or return to it with distaste, after having dipped into the pleasures
(even the refined and reasonable ones) of the world, we are to be pitied, greatly pitied; for
we are strangers to the purest and sweetest joys that are known this side of Paradise.  And,
thank God! this happiness is not confined to the mansion of the rich and the great.  Perhaps
it is less felt there than in the cottage of the virtuous and intelligent poor.

At our mother’s we had quite as much of domestic peace and happiness as we had ever known.
Our little daughter, who, to us at least, looked just as sweet and pretty in her bit calicos
as she had ever done in better and more expensive clothes, beguiled a portion of our evenings
with her music.  She played delightfully on the piano, for a child of her age; and then she
had conceived an idea (perhaps from something her father or mother had said) that the day might
come when, by teaching music and French, she would be their support in old age. This was a
new and beautiful stimulant to study, and we were no less pleased with this virtuous devotion
of her young life, because we confidently believed that no such necessity would ever arise.

We enjoyed society, too–-not quite so much or half as often as when we could return civilities;
but there was an abandonment of feeling, or freedom from care, when we did participate; something
like that expressed by a clerical friend of ours, who, upon beholding the beautiful grounds
of a wealthy gentleman, congratulated himself upon his capacity for enjoying them as much as
the proprietor could, “without having his responsibility and care,” which, in some measure,
compensated us.

And, then, your grandfather found out what “a jewel of a wife” he had; how, as with a magic
touch, she could make old things perfectly new, in which she appeared more charming to his
eye than ever before. We are really not dependent upon external circumstances for happiness.
That ingredient of life is found within us; and every one has a share in promoting it.  One
gentle, patient, unselfish, cheerful member of a household, can do wonders towards making the
whole atmosphere of home redolent with his soul-reviving influences.

From what you have seen of your grandfather, you will readily imagine that he must have been
a good son.  He was: one of the best, if not the best, I have ever known.  But facts speak
for themselves.  I have never once heard him speak a hasty or unkind word to his mother. He
was her staff, upon whom she lovingly leaned; and yet, at her bidding, he was her boy, obedient,
and respectful.  As she declined in life, “when they shall be afraid of that which is high,
and fears shall be in the way,” and many infirmities made her irritable and exacting, the charm
of his loving voice, playfully and skillfully giving a turn to the current of her feelings,
would alternately soothe, comfort, and amuse her.  He was thoughtful of her every wish and
comfort, and did all that he could to fill the void which death had made in that aged heart.

Some of the most striking proofs of his pure and elevated character, of his disinterested friendship
and love, delicacy forbids me to speak of, as there are those living who might be touched by
them. But I have given facts enough to show that he was no ordinary man.  He was fond of reading,
quick of perception, and given to investigation. There were but few subjects with which he
was not more or less acquainted.  For, notwithstanding his close business habits, he found
much time for his favorite occupation of reading; by which means he kept up with the religious,
political, and literary news of the day. He was a good historian, and possessed a retentive
memory.  I never thought of referring to an encyclopedia, or to a dictionary, when he was present;
for I found it so much easier, and more pleasant, to obtain needed information from him.  As
regards the intellectual character of his mind, however, I do not think it was of the highest
stamp.  Of all practical things he had a decided opinion.  His judgment was sound.  Not marred
by prejudice, nor warped by self-love, or self-praise, or self-aggrandisement, he was enabled
coolly to exercise his powers of mind in forming a just estimate of men and things.  He possessed
strong common sense, which, being balanced by a high moral tone, and refined sensibilities,
enabled him to be quick in discerning the characters of men, but tenderly careful of their
feelings and reputation.  I do not think his mind was of a metaphysical cast.  He never willingly
engaged in argument of any kind, nor conversed upon abstruse subjects.  He enjoyed learned
disquisitions just as he did a fine painting, the excellencies and beauties of which he appreciated,
and could point out, without knowing how to use the brush or the pencil.

He had a keen appreciation of natural beauty, and of the art which could represent it, either
on canvas or in marble.  He was fond of poetry.  But of all the poets, Burns stood first in
his estimation. He could enter so easily into the spirit of this writer, because, in some respects,
they were kindred spirits.  Burns’ touching pathos, his humor, his love and pity for man and
beast, penetrated his own humorous and nature-loving soul. When the centenary celebration of
the birth of this great poet took place in St. Louis, a few years ago, he was absent, and I
attended, not only for personal gratification, but that I might, upon his return, give him
an account of it. By Mr. Price, who was afterwards head master of the same school, and whose name
I cannot mention without reverence and affection, I have been told that Johnson, when late in life
he visited the place of his education, shewed him a nook in the school-room, where it was usual
for the boys to secrete the translations of the books they were reading; and, at the same time,
speaking of his old master, Hunter, said to him, "He was not severe,
Sir. A master ought to be severe.

Sir, he was cruel." Johnson, however, was always ready to acknowledge how much he was indebted to Hunter
for his classical proficiency. At the age of fifteen, by the advice of his mother's nephew,
Cornelius Ford, a clergyman of considerable abilities, but disgraced
by the licentiousness of his life, and who is spoken of in the Life
of Fenton, he was removed to the grammar-school of Stourbridge, of
which Mr. Wentworth was master.

Here he did not remain much more than a twelvemonth, and, as he told Dr. Percy, learned much in
the school, but little from the master; whereas, with Hunter, he had learned much from the master,
and little in the school. The progress he made was, perhaps, gained in teaching the other boys,
for Wentworth is said to have employed him as an assistant. His compositions in English verse indicate
that command of language which he afterwards attained. The two following years he accuses himself
of wasting in idleness at home; but we must doubt whether he had
much occasion for self-reproach, when we learn that Hesiod, Anacreon,
the Latin works of Petrarch, and "a great many other books not commonly
known in the Universities," were among his studies.

His father, though a man of strong understanding, and much respected
in his line of life, was not successful in business.

He must, therefore, have had a firm reliance on the capacity of his son; for while he chided
him for his want of steady application, he resolved on making so great an effort as to send him
to the University; and, accompanying him thither, placed him, on the 31st of October, 1728,
a commoner at Pembroke College, Oxford. Some assistance was, indeed, promised him from other
quarters, but this assistance was never given; nor was his industry quickened by his necessities.
He was sometimes to be seen lingering about the gates of his college;
and, at others, sought for relief from the oppression of his mind
in affected mirth and turbulent gaiety.

So extreme was his poverty, that he was prevented by the want of
shoes from resorting to the rooms of his schoolfellow, Taylor, at
the neighbouring college of Christ Church; and such was his pride,
that he flung away with indignation a new pair that he found left
at his door.

His scholarship was attested by a translation into Latin verse of
Pope's Messiah; which is said to have gained the approbation of that
poet.

But his independent spirit, and his irregular habits, were both likely
to obstruct his interest in the University; and, at the end of three
years, increasing debts, together with the failure of remittances,
occasioned by his father's insolvency, forced him to leave it without
a degree.

Of Pembroke College, in his Life of Shenstone, and of Sir Thomas Browne, he has spoken with
filial gratitude. From his tutor, Mr. Jorden, whom he described as a "worthy man, but a heavy
one," he did not learn much. What he read solidly, he said, was Greek; and that Greek, Homer
and Euripides; but his favourite study was metaphysics, which we must suppose him to have investigated
by the light of his own meditation, for he did not read much in it. With Dr. Adams, then a
junior fellow, and afterwards master of the College, his friendship continued till his death.
I laid down eleven guineas. On which day, I received the whole of what it is allowed me to expect
from my father's property, before the decease of my mother (which I pray may be yet far distant)
namely, twenty pounds. My fortune therefore must be of my own making. Meanwhile, let me beware
lest the powers of my mind grow languid through poverty, or want drive me to evil." On the
following day we find him setting out on foot for Market Bosworth, in Leicestershire, where he
had engaged himself as an usher to the school of which Mr. Crompton was master. Here he described
to his old school-fellow, Hector, the dull sameness of his life, in the words of the poet:
Vitam continct una dies: that it was as unvaried as the note of the cuckoo, and that he did not
know whether it were more disagreeable for him to teach, or for the boys to learn the grammar
rules. To add to his misery, he had to endure the petty despotism of Sir Wolstan Dixie, one
of the patrons of the school. The trial of a few months disgusted him so much with his employment,
that he relinquished it, and, removing to Birmingham, became the guest of his friend Mr. Hector,
who was a chirurgeon in that town, and lodged in the house of a bookseller;
having remained with him about six months, he hired lodgings for himself.

By Mr. Hector he was stimulated, not without some difficulty, to make a translation from the
French, of Lobo's Voyage to Abyssinia, for which he received no more than five guineas from the
bookseller, who, by an artifice not uncommon, printed it at Birmingham, with the date of London
in the title-page. To Mr. Hector, therefore, is due the impulse which first made Johnson an
author. The motion being once given did not cease; for, having returned to Lichfield in 1735,
he sent forth in August proposals for printing by subscription Politian's Latin Poems, with
a Life of the Author, Notes, and a History of Latin Poetry, from the age of Petrarch to that of
Politian. His reason for fixing on this era it is not easy to determine. Mussato preceded
Petrarch, the interval between Petrarch and Politian is not particularly
illustrated by excellence in Latin poetry; and Politian was much surpassed
in correctness and elegance, if not in genius, by those who came after
him--by Flaminio, Navagero, and Fracastorio.

Yet in the hands of Johnson, such a subject would not have been wanting in instruction or entertainment.
Such as were willing to subscribe, were referred to his brother, Nathaniel Johnson, who had
succeeded to his father's business in Lichfield; but the design was dropped, for want of a sufficient
number of names to encourage it, a deficiency not much to be wondered at, unless the inhabitants
of provincial towns were more learned in those days than at present.

In this year, he made another effort to obtain the means of subsistence by an offer of his pen to
Cave, the editor of the Gentleman's Magazine; but the immediate result of the application is
not known; nor in what manner he supported himself till July 1736, when he married Elizabeth Porter,
the widow of a mercer at Birmingham, and daughter of William Jervis, Esq. of Great Peatling,
in Leicestershire. This woman, who was twenty years older than himself, and to whose daughter
he had been an unsuccessful suitor, brought him eight hundred pounds; but, according to Garrick's
report of her, was neither amiable nor handsome, though that she was both in Johnson's estimation appears
from the epithets "formosae, cultae, ingeniosae," which he inscribed on her tombstone. Their
nuptials were celebrated at Derby, and to that town they went together on horseback from Birmingham;
but the bride assuming some airs of caprice on the road, like another Petruchio he gave her
such effectual proofs of resolution, as reduced her to the abjectness
of shedding tears.

His first project after his marriage was to set up a school; and, with this intention, he hired
a very commodious house, at the distance of about two miles from Lichfield, called Edial Hall,
which has lately been taken down, and of which a representation is to be seen in the History of
Lichfield, by Mr. Harwood. One of my friends, who inhabited it for the same purpose, has told
me that an old countryman who lived near it, and remembered Johnson and his pupil Garrick, said
to him, "that Johnson was not much of a scholar to look at, but that master Garrick was a strange
one for leaping over a stile." It is amusing to observe the impressions which such men make
on common minds. Unfortunately the prejudice occasioned by Johnson's unsightly exterior was
not confined to the vulgar, insomuch that it has been thought to be the reason why so few parents committed
their children to his care, for he had only three pupils. This unscholarlike appearance it must have
been that made the bookseller in the Strand, to whom he applied for literary employment, eye him
archly, and recommend it to him rather to purchase a porter's knot. But, as an old philosopher has
said, every thing has two handles. It was, perhaps, the contrast between the body and the mind,
between the incultum corpus, and the ingenium, which afterwards was one cause of his being received
so willingly in those circles of what is called high life, where any thing that is exceedingly
strange and unusual is apt to carry its own recommendation with it. Failing in his attempt
at Edial, he was disposed once more to engage in the drudgery of an usher, and offered himself
in that capacity to the Rev. William Budworth, master of the grammar-school at Brewood, in
Staffordshire, celebrated for having been the place in which Bishop Hurd received his education,
under that master. But here again nature stood in his way; for Budworth was fearful lest a strange
motion with the head, the effect probably of disease, to which Johnson was habitually subject,
might excite the derision of his scholars, and for that reason declined employing him. He now
resolved on trying his fortune in the capital.

Among the many respectable families in Lichfield, into whose society
Johnson had been admitted, none afforded so great encouragement to
his literary talents as that of Mr. Walmsley, who lived in the Bishop's
palace, and was registrar of the Ecclesiastical Court, and whom he
has so eloquently commemorated in his Lives of the Poets.

By this gentleman he was introduced in a letter to the Rev. Mr. Colson, Lucasian Professor
of Mathematics in the University of Cambridge, and the master of an academy, "as a very good scholar,
and one who he had great hopes would turn out a fine dramatic writer, who intended to try his
fate with a tragedy, and to get himself employed in some translation, either from the Latin
or the French." The tragedy on which Mr. Walmsley founded his expectations of Johnson's future
eminence as a dramatic poet, was the Irene. A shrewd sally of humour, to which the reading of this
piece gave rise, evinces the terms of familiarity on which he was with his patron; for, on Walmsley's
observing, when some part of it had been read, that the poet had already involved his heroine in
such distress, that he did not see what further he could do to excite
the commiseration of the audience, Johnson replied, "that he could
put her into the Ecclesiastical Court."

Garrick, who was to be placed at Colson's academy, accompanied his former instructor on this
expedition to London, at the beginning of March, 1737. It does not appear that Mr. Walmsley's recommendation
of him to Colson, whom he has described under the character of Gelidus[2], in the twenty-fourth
paper of the Rambler, was of much use. He first took lodgings in Exeter-street in the Strand, but
soon retired to Greenwich, for the sake of completing his tragedy, which he used to compose,
walking in the Park.

From Greenwich, he addressed another letter to Cave, with proposals for translating Paul Sarpi's
History of the Council of Trent, with the notes of Le Courayer. Before the summer was expired,
he returned for Mrs. Johnson, whom he had left at Lichfield, and remaining there three months,
at length finished Irene. The debates in Parliament were not then allowed to be given to the public
with the same unrestricted and generous freedom with which it is now permitted to report them.
To elude this prohibition, and gratify the just curiosity of the country, the several members were
designated by fictitious names, under which they were easily discoverable; and their speeches
in both Houses of Parliament, which was entitled the Senate of Lilliput, were in this manner
imparted to the nation in the periodical work above-mentioned. At first, Johnson only revised
these reports; but he became so dexterous in the execution of his task, that he required only
to be told the names of the speakers, and the side of the question to be espoused, in order
to frame the speeches himself; an artifice not wholly excusable, which afterwards occasioned him
some self-reproach, and even at the time pleased him so little, that he did not consent to
continue it. The whole extent of his assistance to Cave is not known. The Lives of Paul Sarpi,
Boerhaave, Admirals Drake and Blake, Barretier, Burman, Sydenham, and Roscommon, with the Essay
on Epitaphs, and an Essay on the Account of the Conduct of the Duchess of Marlborough, were certainly
contributed to his Miscellany by Johnson.

Two tracts, the one a Vindication of the Licenser of the Stage from the Aspersions of Brooke,
Author of Gustavus Vasa; the other, Marmor Norfolciense, a pamphlet
levelled against Sir Robert Walpole and the Hanoverian succession,
were published by him, separately, in 1739.

For his version of Sarpi's History, he had received from Cave, before the 21st of April in this
year, fifty pounds, and some sheets of it had been committed to the press, when, unfortunately, the
design was stopped, in consequence of proposals appearing for a translation of the same book,
by another person of the same name as our author, who was curate of St. Martin's in the Fields,
and patronized by Dr. Pearce, the editor of Longinus. Warburton [3] afterwards expressed a
wish that Johnson would give the original on one side, and his translation on the other. His
next engagement was to draw up an account of the printed books in the Earl of Oxford's library,
for Osborne, the bookseller, who had purchased them for thirteen thousand pounds. Such was
the petulant impatience of Osborne, during the progress of this irksome task, that Johnson was once
irritated so far as to beat him.

In May, 1738, appeared his "London," imitated from the Third Satire of Juvenal, for which he got
ten guineas from Dodsley. The excellence of this poem was so immediately perceived, that it
reached a second edition in the course of a week. Pope having made some ineffectual inquiries
concerning the author, from Mr. Richardson, the son of the painter, observed that he would soon
be deterre. In the August of 1739, we find him so far known to Pope, that at his intercession,
Earl Gower applied to a friend of Swift to assist in procuring from the University the degree
of Master of Arts, that he might be enabled to become a candidate for the mastership of a school
then vacant; the application was without success.

His own wants, however pressing, did not hinder him from assisting his mother, who had lost her other
son.

A letter to Mr. Levett, of Lichfield, on the subject of a debt, for which he makes himself responsible
on her account, affords so striking a proof of filial tenderness, that I cannot refuse myself
the pleasure of transcribing it.

In the following year (1744) he produced his Life of Savage, a work that gives the charm of a romance
to a narrative of real [**re in original] events; and which, bearing the stamp of that eagerness
[**ea ness in original] and rapidity with which it was thrown off the mind of the writer,
exhibits rather the fervour of an eloquent advocate, than the laboriousness of a minute biographer.
The forty-eight octavo pages, as he told Mr. Nichols [4], were written in one day and night.
At its first appearance it was warmly praised, in the Champion, probably either by Fielding, or
by Ralph, who succeeded to him in a share of that paper; and Sir Joshua Reynolds, when it came
into his hand, found his attention so powerfully arrested, that he read it through without changing
his posture, as he perceived by the torpidness of one of his arms that had rested on a chimney-piece
by which he was standing. For the Life of Savage [5], he received fifteen guineas from Cave.
About this time he fell into the company of Collins, with whom, as he tells us in his life of that
poet, he delighted to converse. These observations were favourably mentioned by Warburton,
in the preface to his edition; and Johnson's gratitude for praise bestowed at a time when
praise was of value to him, was fervent and lasting.
  Since I have been in this great city I have also
been very closely engaged with my business, and have visited, as yet, none of its wonders.
We have tonight, at the house where I am staying, a very large company, assembled to celebrate
the landing of the Puritans in New England.  They had a most splendid table, filled with every
luxury; and they have Mr. Webster, who is to make a speech to them.  Mr. Choate delivered an
address to-day, in the Tabernacle.  So, you see, we have grand doings.

“Well, I feel more happy up in my little room, away from the noise and bustle, writing to my
daughter, and thinking of her dear mother and grandma, and cousin Eliza, and all that are so
dear to us. My dear, when I think how God has blessed you, and all of us, and when I think
how wicked we have been, what stubborn and disobedient children we have all been, and how little
we love that Saviour who has done so much for us, I feel very much condemned.  God would be
just, if he should at once punish us.  We should be very prayerful, and pray earnestly and
continually, for a new heart and a right spirit, and that we may all be truly converted, and
fitted to serve Him with our whole hearts.”

His humility is plainly seen in this quotation, as it often was in his prayers, when he seemed
more like a little child, seeking his Father’s face, than an elder in the Church, conscious
of setting an example to the flock.

In the first letter your mother received from her father, in the winter of 1846-7, after we
were settled in Mobile, he says: “My dear child, I hope, needs no hint to urge her in attention
and kindness to a mother whose happiness is so dependent upon her child.  Your father, immersed
in the business of the world, and his feelings hardened by the adverse and trying scenes which
he is constantly called to breast, is not so alive to, and dependent for happiness, as the
mother is upon her husband and child; and, in the absence of the former, the weightier duties
devolve on you, and I confidently feel that you will fulfil them all cheerfully, and partake
of the happiness their performance affords. I pray that the Spirit of all Grace may impart
to you all the strength and grace you need, and that you may be guided to the Saviour, in whom
you will find fullness of joy, and a peace which passeth all knowledge.”

After writing another page, in which he gives all “the news,” he says: “’Grandma’ says, ‘tell
Lizzie I do miss her so much!’  She says the birds are fine and healthy, and are well taken
care of.  So are the pigeons, for several of the neighboring boys have erected more comfortable
winter quarters for them, than they had in your boxes, and they have nearly all left us and
gone to the neighbors, much to the distress of John, who cannot be reconciled to such ingratitude,
not even in pigeons.  For he says, ‘I feeds them every morning, and as soon as they get the
corn they fly away.’ So you will find the world, my dear girl; when they get nothing more from
us either in a pecuniary or other point of view, they cease to care for, or to be interested
in us. We are therefore warned to seek happiness at home.  And the well cultivated, and well
balanced mind will always find it there, where no one can deprive us of it.  Will you not seek
that happiness?  It is to be found with the blessed Saviour.  He alone can impart it; but He
promises that all who seek shall find, and that none shall be turned away without it, if they
will seek Him in the appointed way.”  This letter was written on thanksgiving day.  Further
on, he continues: “And have we not great reason to render thanks to our heavenly Father, when
we see how great are his mercies to us, that we have such an abundant harvest while nearly
all Europe is in a starving condition?  I really think that we have, for these mercies are
most undeserved and unmerited; for we have not sought the Lord as we should have done, but
have widely departed from him, as a people, and followed the guidance of our own wicked hearts.
But let us fear and humble ourselves and repent; and seek the pardon of our sins, and determine
that let others do as they will, as for us we will seek and serve the Lord our God! Oh, I pray
that the Blessed Spirit may incline the heart of my dear child to consecrate her heart and
soul to the service of her Saviour, and her Redeemer.”

His concern for the conversion of his child was not always seen in his letters to her.  I have
just read one embracing seven pages of large letter paper, in which he tells much of interest
about every thing and every body, in a lively jocose strain, but says not a word on the subject
of religion.  Among other things he says, “But I have never told you about our dog, Nimrod.
Why, he has improved wonderfully in size, beauty, manners, &c.  You will be perfectly delighted
with him. He is no longer a country dog, but is becoming a real city bred gentlemanly dog.
The fond companion of Miss Annie Blow in her rambles around the well, cistern, and even out
into the alley.  And never comes into the dining room, kitchen, or your grandma’s room, without
being pressingly invited.  Having upon his first arrival received divers striking hints, his
intellect has become very sharp, and his sense of propriety very much quickened in regard to
all these matters.”  Towards the close of January instead of the usual reception of letters
every few days, we experienced the far greater happiness of seeing him, which was only marred
by the stern necessity of his having to leave us again. In May he returned, bringing my sister
with him, to remain until after “the examination” of Madame De Fellon’s school.  In the meanwhile
we made up our mind to pay another visit to Pascagoula, from whence I see he wrote to our daughter
as follows:

Pascagoula, May 18, 1847.

“Dear Daughter:  We avail ourselves of the return of Dr. F. to send you a few lines to let
you know how we are getting on in these diggings.  We arrived safely last Friday evening, and
found Mrs. F. and O. pleased to see us.  The General is over on “Round Island,” whither we
attempted, this morning, to go, but were driven back by the head winds.  Your mother and aunt
were wet by the spray but have experienced no inconvenience from it.  They are both well. 
We missed you very much this morning when the fish were biting almost as fast as we could bate
our lines and throw them into the water.  Your mother caught nearly two dozen cats before breakfast.
But you need not come as there are no redfish or sheepshead, or trout, nothing to be caught
but cats and croakers, and I know you are too fastidious in your piscal taste to delight in
such sport.  We would have been much pleased to have had dear daughter with us.  But hope that
you have improved the time, so that when the examination comes off we shall be delighted with
the proficiency you have made in your studies.  ‘Mother’ and ‘aunt’ send their love to you.
Ever your devoted, FATHER.”

After the examination, in June, we returned to St. Louis.  The encouragement we felt from the
effect of the last winter upon my health, induced us to try another winter’s sojourn in the
South, with the hope that a permanent restoration would be the result. Consequently in December
following, your grandfather took us to Mobile and settled us for the winter.  Soon after which
we returned home, by way of the eastern cities, for the purpose of purchasing his stock of
goods for the next spring.

After again taking leave of the dearest objects of his earthly affection, he pursues his solitary
way.  From “Charleston, Dec. 22nd, 1847,” he writes:

“My Dear Daughter:  To redeem my promise to write alternately to you and dear mother, I date
my first to you from this City of Palms.  I wrote from Montgomery, the capital of Alabama,
last, sitting in the Senate chamber, which was beautifully adorned with curtains, and furnished
with rosewood desks and rosewood and damask velvet cushioned chairs; everything having the
air of majesty-–the majesty of the sovereign people.  Since which time, I have been compelled
to descend from my lofty flights to the real democracy, as I have had rough traveling, and
the roughest kind of fare.  After two and one-half days’ hard traveling (night and day), I
arrived her yesterday afternoon, completely worn out, and determined to lay over one day at
this place. Having slept soundly, and removed the lamp-black and dust, I feel this morning
quite well again, and shall leave to-day for Wilmington, North Carolina, by sea, in a fine
steamer.  The weather is very fine, and I think I shall have a quick and pleasant journey."

“I had the honor of traveling with Maj. Gen. Quitman and family from Montgomery to Augusta,
George, where he was invited to remain and receive the congratulations of the citizens.  The
General, accustomed to command, could not well put up with the little deference paid him by
his fellow-travelers, and was much annoyed that they were not restrained until he and his family
were provided for.  He is expected here to-day, and all the military are ordered out to receive
him. General Shields has been here for several days, feasted and honored by this city, and
the capital, Columbia, where the Legislature have voted him a splendid sword, the use of which
he has so well practiced in Mexico."

“This is really a very beautiful and pleasant city, and has much of a business appearance.
The streets are wide.  It has a fine market-house.  The Citadel is an old-fashioned fort, now
used as a military school; for you must know that South Carolina is, or claims to be, the most
chivalrous State in the Union; and her great men–-Mr. Calhoun, Preston, McDuffy, and a host
of others–-stand high among the great men of the nation."

“I suppose you are, long before this, comfortably fixed at school, and mother has”-–etc., etc.

You see, my children, from these several specimen letters, that your grandfather allowed no
opportunity to pass unimproved.  That, however, limited his time, he always found time to observe
and to write.  Neglect of duty had no place in his head or heart.  It gratified him to serve
his friends in any and in every way; but his devotion to his immediate family, in every respect,
was remarkable.  No display, no effort marked his intercourse with them, which made it only
the more precious, for they well knew that love and kindness prompted his every act.

He wrote from New York–-after having written from every stopping-place on his way thither-–giving
a more detailed account of his duties and pleasures which occupied every moment of his time
there. In one of these letters he says: “I have been this evening to see Powers’ Greek Slave,
and think it the most beautiful thing I ever saw. It is a perfect model of the human form,
and as you gaze at it you perceive new beauties every moment.  The face, the neck, the arms,
and hands, in fact every limb, and every muscle, are perfect; and the marble seems to have
that softness and delicacy which we see in a young and beautiful girl.  But you must see it
to realize all its beauties, which I hope you will have an opportunity of doing next spring."

“I am very well, and have nothing to trouble me but our separation, and the thoughts of the
long and wearisome months that must elapse before I can again clasp my dear wife and child
to my arms.  But I trust that it will be best for us both, and that it will be the last time
on this earth.”

In another letter from New York, dated January 4th, 1848, after a good deal of good advice
to his child, and a faithful dealing with her peculiar faults, he writes: “With all the other
matters, do not, my dear daughter, forget to learn the most important of all lessons-–the end
for which you were placed on this earth; for which mind and body were given you: “that you
glorify God here, and enjoy Him forever’ in the world to come.  That you know, experimentally,
Jesus Christ, now in the morning of life, whom to know aright is eternal life; who is love,
and who has promised to love all who come unto Him by faith.  I am sure that there is nothing
that would gratify your parents so much as to see you, with all the fervor and ardor of youth,
seeking and serving this, the best of masters; devoting your best affections to Him who sticketh
closer, under every trial, than parent or friend.”

I will quote another short extract from a letter dated “St. Louis, March 3d, 1848.”  In giving
an account of a revival of religion, naming the number of persons who were about to unite with
the Second Presbyterian church, he says: “How delighted would I be, could I see dear daughter
a bright Christian, devoting all her powers and energies to the service of the blessed Saviour!
How much more important is it to be educated to shine in Heaven than to be a star in this world
of sorrow and affliction, where there is no solid enjoyment, and where all is transitory and
evanescent.  I pray that you may be led to a wise choice in these things.”

As soon as the winter months were over-–becoming impatient under such a long separation-–we
determined to cut short our stay in the “Sunny South.”  The greatly improved health of her
for whose sake the sacrifice had been made, was ever afterwards a cause of gratulation.

In April we returned to St. Louis, with joyous anticipations of the future.  The darling of
our hearts was fast blooming into womanhood.  Her father had purchased the residence which
my brother had built for his own use, and which, above all others, we preferred, (especially
as it was near to that of his aged mother), and we hoped before long to be permanently settled.

But as this letter has reached its full length, I will close it, with the best love poor grandma
has to offer from her desolate and stricken heart.

Letter Thirteen

My Dear Grandchildren:

In the summer of 1848 your beloved grandfather, to whom no discharge of duty in the Church
of God was felt to be a sacrifice, again determined to change his church connection.  A feeble
little church, painting for existence, without a pastor or house to worship in, solicited help
from the mother church.  Every Christian felt that the increasing wants of our growing city
demanded more churches, but how many in the Second Presbyterian could obtain their own consent
to exchange the comfort and ease of this elegant temple, which at length, after much self-denial
of its members, was almost free from debt, and whose pulpit was adorned with the gifted and
talented Dr. Potts! who could give up their cushioned and carpeted pews, the choice choir,
the grand organ, and the many sweet Christian associations of past years, and throw in their
lot with a little handfull of Jesus’ praying disciples, who had few possessions, save that
faith which made them lovingly cling to their Master’s cause?  My husband had been one of the
first to assist in building up the Second Presbyterian church.  He was an Elder, and a Trustee,
and, after much anxiety, and the utmost straining of his ability to raise and to contribute
funds towards the completion of their house of worship, he was just beginning to enjoy the
comfort of seeing the debt, which had hung as an incubus over it for years, wiped out, when
this new call was made upon him.  A few young people proposed to go out to the assistance of
the feeble church, upon the condition that Mr. Charless and Mr. Keith would go with them -–wisely
concluding that the attempt to sustain it without some such efficient aid, would be utterly
in vain.  It was thought, however, by the members generally, that it was a useless undertaking
to keep the little church, as such, alive; and that it would be better for its few advocates
to be merged into the different churches already established. Yet all seemed to think that
St. Louis, growing as it was so rapidly in population and in wickedness, needed more houses
of public worship; but most of the members of this church evidently shrank from the self-denial
necessary thereto.

Your grandfather did not at once accede to this proposal, without first consulting his wife,
as to her views, and especially her feelings, and she could not have it in her heart to consider
her own comfort and pleasure, or that of their daughter, when he so evidently felt that, for
him, this was the path of duty.  I cheerfully consented; but, looking back at the “flesh-pots
of Egypt” (and there is no doubt a great deal of this kind of worldliness carried even into
the Holy place), I requested that we should retain our pew, calculating, as soon as the young
church was fairly established, again to occupy it.  We both loved and admired, and, like everybody
else, felt proud of our minister–-for, without doubt, he stood among the first, if not at the
head of the Presbyterian church in the West-–and we knew that no Dr. Potts could be obtained
for this poor little church, which seemed to be tossed upon the breakers, and ready to sink.
But my husband, like the early disciples, would have been pleased to toil all night upon the
sea of Galilee, and at early dawn would have been seen mending the meshes of the broken net,
making ready for another day or night of toil, while I would have preferred to sit with the
five thousand upon the green grass, to be fed.  But I never could gainsay or resist the few,
simply spoken words, that revealed the cherished purpose of his soul, adorned, as they were,
with eloquence of his unobtrusive and devoted piety.  Of the difficulties and hardships endured
by that faithful little band before a flourishing church was really established, and what part
the subject of this brief history took in it, I must refer you to others, who know the particulars
better than I do, and will proceed to other matters.

Early in the fall of 1848 we placed our dear Lizzie at school in Philadelphia, under the care
of Mrs. Gardell, who deservedly enjoyed the highest reputation as an instructress of young
ladies, being untiring in her efforts to cultivate their hearts, no less than their minds and
manners.  From the letters of her father, written during that time, I will make but one quotation,
merely to show how earnestly he ever longed for the spiritual good of his beloved daughter:
“Do you ever think on the subject of your soul’s salvation?-–of its value-–of the importance
of giving the subject that attention its magnitude demands, in the morning of life, when the
feelings and emotions of the heart are warm and generous-–before the temper and disposition
are soured by disappointment?  It was for this reason our blessed Saviour desired the young
to come unto Him.  My dear daughter, you cannot tell how happy your mother and I would be to
know that you had consecrated yourself, heart, soul, and body, to the Lord, to serve Him faithfully
in this world, that you might be permitted to enjoy Him in mansions of peace in that which
is to come.  This is the tenor of our morning and evening prayers, and, we trust, of yours also.”

It was our intention to keep our Lizzie at this school for two years, but, the cholera making
its appearance in the United States-–a more terrible epidemic than ever before, in the spring
of 1849-–determined us to bring her home at the expiration of the first year.  Especially as
this fearful disease had exhausted itself in St. Louis during that summer, while we were with
her at Newport and Nahant, out of its reach, and as it had not yet swept through Philadelphia,
we deemed it safest to bring her home, where she might still pursue her studies under the instruction
of private teachers.

From the time we had solemnly vowed at the baptismal font to train our child, not for this
perishing world, but for Heaven, and thereby could claim the rich promise of a covenant-keeping
God-–“I will be a God to you, and to your seed”–-nothing had caused us more anxiety than to
know how wisely and faithfully to discharge our duties towards her.  Whether strictly to force
her into measures, or, by a mild and firm treatment, to win her to love the religion of her
parents, was often discussed by us when alone in our chamber.  We observed, with pain, that
many of the children of our beloved church, whose parents believed that they could do no better
part by them than strictly to carry out the rules of the church concerning worldliness, and
would not, for any consideration, allow them to learn how to dance, or to attend a dancing
party, were by far the giddiest and most reckless of young people.  Some, first uniting with
the Church, and afterwards disgracing their profession, while still under parental guidance;
others, waiting until they were married, and were countenanced by a worldly husband, before
throwing off all restraint, and showing these “long-faced Presbyterians” how amazingly dashy
and gay they could be.  With what natural grace and ease they can now discuss the merits or
demerits of the last play!  What a keen relish they have for balls!  How charming the masquerade
was!  What delightful sport, in masque, to tell disagreeable and sarcastic truths (or falsities,
perhaps), to some luckless ones who very innocently, but ignorantly, preferred to look on at
the droll sight with their faces uncovered!  Oh, what a disgrace to the child, who, for the
sake of a few years (perhaps days) of false and empty pleasure, can do such violence to the
feelings of parents, who, whatever their errors, truly love, and would sacrifice everything,
except their hope of Heaven, to bless their children and do them good.

Your grandfather, my dear children, who was no extremist, but was “moderate in all things,”
thought it best to let his child enjoy everything that was innocent; that, while an act of
disobedience-–an untruth, or any direct breach of “The Commandments”-–would cause his displeasure,
and was followed by a look that penetrated your mother’s soul, and was a far greater punishment
than the rod of her mother, yet she might dance as much as she pleased, for “dancing was children’s
sport.”  But when she would gravely ask, if, like her school-mates, she might not go to a dancing
school, she would be told that her papa and mamma had promised God to bring her up for Heaven,
and that they would not be doing that if they fitted her for the gay world: that she must not
forget that she was a baptized child of the Church.  If she looked doubtful, or was inclined
to urge the matter, we would ask her if she wanted us to break our word to God-–which, like
any other conscientious child, she would recoil from.  When in her sixteenth year, however,
while at boarding-school in Mobile, she expressed a greater desire than ever before to take
lessons in dancing.  They were given in the school, and confined to the pupils; not at night,
but in the afternoon, when she required exercise instead of sleep; and we determined, after
serious and prayerful reflection, to indulge her in this very natural wish, believing that
longer opposition might be attended with a still stronger desire for the forbidden thing, which
she could see no harm in, nor we, if confined to the social circle.  We knew that God alone
could make her a Christian–-could turn her heart from the love of the world to that of holiness-–and
we did not believe that He would be less willing to do so because of our yielding to her wishes
in this respect, which, our child clearly understood, was done, not from inconsistency on our
part, or a vain desire to see her admired in the world; but from a conviction that, at her
age, some consideration should be shown to her reasonable desires; especially as she was far
from esteeming this indulgence as a license to unbounded worldliness; that the theater and
the ball-room were to be conscientiously avoided, as the road that led directly away from all
that was pure, holy and happy.  And I am now gratified in saying that we have never had cause
to regret the course we pursued in this matter -–which ceased to be overrated as soon as its
depths were sounded-–our daughter finding, by experience, how empty and shallow this greatly
overrated enjoyment is, compared to others, even of a worldly and social nature; how far it
falls below the more refined joys of a less conspicuous but more reasonable and choice character,
which the cultivated alone can appreciate.

The young lady days, no less than those of her childhood, your mother will tell you, were happy
days.  Restrained in that only which her parents, and her own conscience, deemed wrong, she
was as free and joyous as the birds that carol in their native air.  When her sprightly and
impulsive nature inclined her to go beyond the bounds of propriety, she was checked.  Readily
indulged in every reasonable desire, and knowing that nothing worldly afforded her parents
so much happiness as that of her own, she did not long mourn over occasional disappointments
in personal gratification, which, if indulged in, might have reasonably reflected discredit,
if not on her, at least on the religious position of her parents.  She had to be reminded,
now and then, that she was the child of an Elder of the Church; but never did she intentionally
do violence to the feelings or views of him she so much reverenced and loved.

This reminds me of a circumstance, that I will relate:  One evening, when your mother was dressing
for a party, which was to be given at the house of a friend, a very serious accident occurred
a few squares from us.  A May-day celebration of school-girls, with their teachers, parents
and friends, were suddenly startled with the sound and movement of a falling house, and, in
a moment, from the giving way of the floor, they were precipitated from the second story of
the house down to the first, and, after a moment’s pause, into the cellar.  The alarm was soon
noised abroad, and, in a very short time, the building was surrounded by persons-–some, who
had relatives there, in agony to know the worst concerning them, some from curiosity, and others
to render assistance to the sufferers.  Your grandfather rushed to the spot, and remained there
as long as there was anything for him to do, in encouraging the sufferers, and in assisting
them to their homes.

No one was killed–-though I think one person died from the injuries received there, a few days
after the event; but many were dreadfully bruised, and some had limbs broken.  After learning
who constituted the assembly, who was hurt, and how much, and finding that, although we knew
two or three of the injured persons, and entertained a high respect for them, they were not
among our particular friends, nor even in our visiting circle--daughter and I concluded that
there could be no impropriety in her attending the party: the time of starting having been
delayed for awhile, until we were fully assured of all the facts, and had recovered from the
shock felt upon the first alarm.

In less than half an hour after she had gone, her father returned from the scene of the disaster,
and, learning that Lizzie had gone to the party, was amazed and greatly excited, that, “when
our neighbors were dying around us,” our child, knowing the fact, should be permitted to make
one of a gay and thoughtless crowd!  I was taken aback, for I had not realized the distressing
condition of the wounded, and undertook to explain; but feeling condemned, mortified, and chagrined,
I immediately proposed to send for her, which he promptly approved of, and, in a few moments,
the carriage (which had just returned) was sent back, with an explanatory note from me.  Lizzie
had that moment taken her place in a cotillion, when the note was handed her.  She read it,
made an apology to her partner, an explanation to her hostess, bidding her “good evening,”
and, in a few minutes more, she was handed into the parlor at home by her friend and escort,
regretting, most of all, that she had wounded that kind and tender father, who so deeply sympathized
in the sorrows and sufferings of others.

Our house was a gay one.  It was thought too much so by some, and perhaps gave umbrage to the
feelings of a few of them, who, judging from without, as they passed to and fro, and heard
music, and could discern from the street the moving of the heads in the brilliantly lighted
parlors, thought, and said, too, “what a shame to reflect discredit upon the cause of Christ
by revelry and dancing.”  “How much better it would be to appropriate the expenditure of money
in these costly preparations to the poor,” etc., etc.  But, could they have seen and felt the
influence of a Christian light, of which he alone who reflected it was unconscious, as he moved
about in congenial mood with the young and gay, or, quietly conversed with the grave, perhaps
his own dear pastor; had they but known that the calls upon the benevolence of the Christian
man were as sacred, and as cheerfully granted, as those of the indulgent father, perhaps more
so, they would not, I am sure, have been so censorious.  And then, had they known the facts
in the case, that no instrument of music, excepting the piano and guitar, and occasionally
a flute, and no professor to play on them, for the purpose of keeping up a dance, had ever
been in our house, these worthy people, fastidious Christians as they may have been, could
not have felt so grieved.

We used wine too, but only at dinner and at suppers, with the ladies.  No side-board drinking
was ever done in our house.  In our early married life even this was not our custom, for several
reasons, two of which I will name: We were members of the old temperance society, which, however,
did not forbid the moderate use of wine; but to be consistent with the spirit of our pledge,
we used it only when some friend dined with us, whom we supposed was so accustomed to it, that
he could not dine with comfort or pleasure without it.  We did at one time introduce claret,
as an every-day drink at dinner.  We had been South for the first time, where the use of this
mild wine is a universal practice, especially in New Orleans and Mobile.  My husband and sister
became quite fond of it, and so did our little Lizzie, who was then only five years old.  Her
father, consequently, purchased a cask for home use, had it bottled and sent to the house.
But we found that our “cold water” brothers became quite excited after drinking it, one saying-–“Sister,
I felt like walking over the tops of houses, yesterday, after dinner.”  Another complained
of the wine flying up into his face, making it so red, and all three appearing a little more
merry than usual.  Their good brother-in-law, never having known what a selfish feeling was,
thought this may be the first step towards giving these boys a taste for drink, and determined
at once to forego personal gratification in the use of a beverage which he really enjoyed,
and felt all the better for.  Next day, by order, the wine was not brought, as usual, to the
table.  No remark was made about it, until one of “the boys” asked the servant to hand it.
My husband then in his ordinary modest cheerful way, explained the reason why the wine was
not there. From which time we relapsed into our previous habit of offering a glass of sherry
or madeira, only when politeness suggested it.  But by the time our daughter was grown up,
these brother-sons of his were men, with their habits formed, and capable of judging for themselves,
and he no longer felt it incumbent upon him to be over strict.

“Let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind.”  “To his own Master he standeth or falleth.”
The religion of Jesus Christ is designed for all nations and people, whatever may be their
peculiar views, tastes, or vices, and while it cannot exist in a corrupt heart --and when that
has been changed, savingly touched by the Holy Spirit, the true light will shine out of it-–yet
we should all be careful not to measure other Christians in our measure, which, while it may
be the best one for us, may not be exactly adapted to them.  But more cherished still to her
are the recollections of our religious hours.  The same sweet hymns of praise that she loved
to sing, while away at school, that would bring tears trickling down her sunny face, and with
them that relief which her home-sick heart required, ascended in former times at our morning
and evening orison.  A few friends dropping in to tea were no excuse to evade the worship of
our God.  Regularly the Bible and hymn books were placed, before retiring from table, in front
of your grandfather, and without an apology, excepting occasionally he might say, “it is our
habit,” as he turned the leaves of the Blessed Book.

There were a few restrictions with regard to how often your mother, when a young lady, should
accept invitations to spend the evening out, or have invited company at home, but none was
so strictly regarded as the one concerning Saturday night: for, as in early childhood she had
been taught to put away her toys and irreligious books before the dawn of the Sabbath, she
now found it easy and natural, if not to prepare her mind for the sacred day, at least to engage
in nothing which might physically unfit her for its enjoyments. And the Sabbath was esteemed
“the day of all the week the best.”  Often felt so by her, who, in the midst of this fascinating
and beautiful world, never forgot that it was the burden of her father’s prayers that like
“Mary of old, she might choose that good part which should never be taken from her, and learn
like her, to sit humbly at the feet of Jesus.”  And this quiet day of rest, so still, so sweet,
so unlike the bustle of the world without, is well calculated to arrest the current of worldly
thought, and cause the mind to revert to the impressions of happy childhood, and often to incite
a desire for joys more pure and stable than Earth can afford.

Christians of an ardent temperament, who have come out from the world without having had previous
religious training, are apt to go to extremes, and in trying to keep the Sabbath holy sometimes
become slaves to the day, and only breathe freely when Monday comes. This was not the case
with your grandfather.  The Sabbath seemed to be made for him, not he for the Sabbath.  It
was his day of sacred rest, in which, however, he was not afraid to laugh as heartily as on
other days; nor was he so absorbed in religious duties as to make him less thoughtful of the
ordinary claims of life.  I have often seen him on the afternoon of that day, when the servants
were all out, lay down his religious book or newspaper, and go out to the stable, lead the
horses into the yard, water them at the hydrant, and then turn them loose on the grass plot;
and, seemingly with the greatest delight, he would watch them as they alternately nipped the
green grass, or engaged in those extraordinary fantastic exercises which horses that have been
pent up in the stable, or in harness all the week, know so well how to perform. Our back yard
was separated from the front by a grape arbor, which extended entirely across, and beyond which
boundary the horses were not allowed to pass.  In this yard they had carte blanche in their
Sabbath day recreation, with one exception; they were not to touch the grape vines.  And they
well understood from the wave of the book or handkerchief in the hand of their master (who
generally, on these occasions, sat in one of the arches of the arbor) that they were to approach
no nearer the forbidden thing.  Even horses know what kindness is; and I have often been amused
in looking at them, from the gallery, as they would follow “grandpa” about the yard evincing
evident satisfaction in the many caresses he bestowed upon them.  And had he lived, my precious
little children, you would soon have learned, in your happy experience of his playfulness,
and sympathy with you, on the holy day, that he was far from being a Puritan in his views and
feelings.

In the fall of 1852, again in search of health, which of all things belonging to this life
(save an unblemished character) was ever the most prized by your dear grandfather, we determined
to pass the whole of the approaching winter in the South.  We started early in November, went
to “Bailey’s Springs,” in North Alabama, intending to proceed from thence to Charleston, then
to Mobile, and take New Orleans in our way home in the spring.  But after reaching “the Springs”
we concluded to give them a fair trial before proceeding further, as we understood from friends,
who had tested these waters, that they often proved as beneficial in winter as in summer. 
Accordingly as we had learned that the accommodations were very indifferent, we made arrangements
with the proprietor to rent us three nice, new log cabins, telegraphed to St. Louis for our
servants, carriage and horses, and were speedily set up for ourselves.  With our own kitchen
and cook we needed nothing, for Bailey Springs were situated only nine miles from Florence,
where my parents had lived seven years, more than twenty years previous, and our experience
did not prove the old adage, “out of sight out of mind,” or the truth of the poetical effusion,
“what is friendship but a name.”  For our old friends were friends indeed, evincing the most
delicate attentions, and making up to us the deficiency in our supplies, from a carpet, to
keep the wind from penetrating our open cabin floors, to dog-irons, or a dutch oven, and the
like useful articles, besides many rare sweetmeats from their own choice kitchens.  Our main
supply of provisions, however,--for these Baileys could not understand that mortal man needed
more than “hog and hominy”-–came every week from my nephew’s, who is a cotton planter, residing
eighteen miles from the Springs.  As sure as Friday or Saturday came, so sure came the pack
horse, laden with fresh butter, mutton, &c.  The presiding genius of these luxuries, who safely
guided the richly laden vessel into port, was a grinning, half grown cuffy, whom they called
“Bowlegs.” But my only object in telling you of this delightful, but very novel winter sojourn,
made so pleasant because of the unwearied attentions, and choice society of a small circle
of friends, is to give you a peep at your beloved grandfather in these new circumstances. 
Cut off, necessarily, a greater part of the time from society, in a wild country, without occupation
or recreation, excepting such as we could originate, with many it would have been esteemed
unendurable.  Especially to men possessing the active and stirring habits of a city life, and
to young ladies accustomed to a large circle of congenial friends.  But we did not find it
unendurable by any means. Your mother often said to me while there, “Mother, I did not know
before that my father was such a delightful man, we really need no other society.”

In his gunning excursions, which, in pleasant weather, were frequent, she often accompanied
her father, and, from her account of them, upon their return, you would imagine that nothing
could have been more charming; but, from the appearance of both father and daughter, you would
think they had been rambling over hill and dale, scrambling through briars and wading creeks,
without design, for the game that they sought was rarely found, or if found, lost again, before
the inexperienced huntsman could level his gun.  But who cared for that when they had so much
pleasure and sport notwithstanding, and always such glorious anticipations for the morrow.
Sometimes, in their eager pursuit after game, they would paddle up and down the creek, watching
out on either side for ducks.  On these occasions, Lizzie would hold the steering oar, while
her father made vigorous use of the propelling ones; but one day his “Lady of the Lake,” (as
he called her), in her excitement, at the prospect over the bluffs, of flying ducks, rose to
her feet; and, reeling, tipping, over she went, which was the finale of the ducking for that
day.  From the beneficial effect of the exercise in walking back to “the cabins” no ill result
ensued, and next day they were eager to resume their search.

In rainy weather and of evenings your grandfather would often read aloud, while your mother
and I were engaged in kitting or sewing; or, she would take up her guitar and sing some of
those pretty Scotch airs, of which he was so fond; or, the more deep-toned German songs, which
were favorites of mine.  And thus we passed nearly thee months, happy months, never to be forgotten;
and bidding adieu to these wilds, with improved health, and taking an affectionate leave of
the kindest friends, we pursued our way farther south.

The only time that your dear mother and I were separated from her father, after her return
from school until her marriage, was in the summer of 1853.  In a letter received from him at
that time he says, “I hope and pray that daughter will seriously bring her mind to the consideration
of this most momentous subject.  Oh, that she would remember how good and kind and merciful
God has always been to her, and how strong is the obligation she is under to consecrate herself,
with all her energies, to God’s service.  How happy would we be, could we be permitted to meet
her at the table of our Lord, as an humble follower of the blessed Saviour, to feel that her
peace is made with God, and that her calling and her election is sure.  Nothing which this
earth offers could confer so great happiness upon her parents.  And will she not now try to
find the Saviour, who is always found of them that seek Him earnestly and faithfully?  Your
beloved mother having consecrated her heart to the blessed Saviour, determined to make a public
profession of her faith on the Sabbath morning of February 5th, 1854, when, in the presence
of the congregation of “Pine Street Presbyterian Church,” she went forward to the pulpit (accompanied
by her precious father), and there, under the ministration of Rev. S. B. McPheeters, dedicated
herself, soul and body, to the service of “the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the only
living and true God.”

As soon as this solemn ceremony was concluded, the sweet tones of the organ, accompanied by
the choir, came floating over our heads, and seemed like the music of heaven to our souls.
They sang:

1.

2.

3. “Tell me not of gain or loss, Ease, enjoyment, pomp and power; Welcome poverty and cross
Shame, reproach, affliction’s hour: ‘Follow me!’  I know thy voice; Jesus, Lord, thy steps
I see; Now I take thy yoke by choice; Light thy burden now to me.”

On the 23rd of February, 1854, we gave our dearly beloved child away, to your own dear father.
And the light and joy of our house and hearts, the free and joyous hearted girl, became a wife.

Affectionately yours, GRANDMA.

Letter Fourteen

My Dear Grandchildren:

Before speaking of the changes, the marriage of your mother brought, and the life of self-denial
led by her father, in consequence of it, I will relate a few incidents of his every day life.
I have already said he was kind to the poor.  He was systematic in his contribution for the
benefit of this large class in every city; but that did not deprive him of the pleasure of
throwing a few dimes into the hands of every applicant, although he often felt that they might
be used for a bad purpose and do more harm than good to the recipient.  On one occasion as
I entered the dining room, just before breakfast, he was having a kind and merry chat at the
window, with a shabby looking son of Erin, in the yard below, who declared to his “honor” that
he “hadn’t tasted a drop!” (upon which fact the matter of giving, or not giving, seemed to
turn).  He threw him a piece of money, saying, as he did so, “look out, my friend, or that
quarter will get you into the calaboose.”  Next morning it so happened that your grandfather
was called to that useful, but uninteresting place, to bail out a colored servant, who was
prone, occasionally, to get into scrapes, which subjected him to temporary imprisonment, when,
whom should he find there, safely ensconced in one of the cells, but the Irishman, his “old
customer,” as he called him, in relating the anecdote, which he did with considerable point
and humor, making all around the breakfast table laugh heartily.  At another time, when we
were spending the summer at our country place, near the city, another citizen of the “auld
country” presented himself and asked for work.  “What kind of work can you do?” inquired your
grandfather.  “Work, sir! I am not over particular at all, at all.” “Can you dig potatoes?”
“Praities! Your honor, jist thry me.”  “Well, I will hire you by the day.”  “By the day, and
sure I’ve no place to put my head at night.”  “Well then, my man, I can’t hire you, for I have
no place for you to sleep.”  “Sleep, is it?  I’d never want a better place than with the horses-–the
stable, to be sure, on a bit of straw-–there’s no better place to my mind, sir.”  The poor
fellow’s destitution, his worn and tattered clothes, his tangled hair, with a face young and
simple, but not vicious looking, touched my husband’s heart.  Poor Tommy did know how to dig
potatoes, if he knew nothing else, and his new master set him to work at his small patch, with
the understanding that when he got through with that, he had nothing more for him to do.  But
Tommy took good care not to get through with that potatoe patch, yet he was always as busy
as a bee when he saw “the master” coming that way, who would praise him for his industry and
wink at his tricks.  Tommy was quite a Merry Andrew, and more knave than fool, after all; and
when he became a decent looking man, from the present of a bran new suit–-cap-a-pie–-and a
comb into the bargain, which his thoughtful benefactor procured for him, he was decidedly the
lion of the kitchen cabinet.  But how to get rid of Tommy became at length a serious question.
Just before returning to the city in the fall, he was sent with a note, from “the master,”
to a farmer, hard by, who gave him a trial, but finding that he was not capable of earning
a living, or from some other cause, he soon dismissed him; and, Tommy, much to my dismay, found
his way to our city residence.  But as the developments of his character in civilized life,
were not of the most encouraging nature, it was not a difficult matter for your grandfather
to drive him from the premises.

But there was another poor man, of whom I never speak or think, but with feelings of kindness
and respect.  His remains lie in Bellefontaine, and I have no doubt but that his spirit is
happy in the presence of his God.  He had lived a poor, but honest life in the west of Ireland,
with his wife and children, until, like thousands of his countrymen, he was driven, by hardship
and poverty, to seek a better future in this “land of the free and the home of the brave.”
In extreme poverty they arrived in St. Louis.  Not so many in family as when they bade adieu
to their native land, having buried one or two children on the banks of the Mississippi.  They
had all had “ship fever,” and a more wretched looking family I had never seen.  But notwithstanding
their squalid poverty and wretchedness we found them industrious, good people, and Protestants,
which was an unusual circumstance among this class of Irish.  Your grandfather, who, in his
charities, never seemed to forget that God caused his sun to shine upon the evil as well as
the good, and who could not allow even a beast to suffer from want, took peculiar pleasure
in ministering to the necessities of this virtuous family, and reaped the rare reward of a
rich return in gratitude and love.  Poor David appeared to look up to him as to a superior
being, always addressing him as “Your honor,” in the most respectful manner.  One day as I
was coming out of church I was attracted by the subdued look of this good man, whose tearful
eyes were fixed on Rev. Mr. McPheeters and your grandfather, as they walked together down the
aisle.  I had a good excuse to stop as I was in the advance of my husband, and off to one side
I saw him bow most reverently, as he said, “Your riverence”-–“Your honor,” and out of the abundance
of his heart, while tears streamed down his honest face, he gave utterance to his feelings
of gratitude to God, and to them, for the blessedness of this holy day.  The pathos and eloquence
of the sermon had completely overcome him.  David was a farmer, and after having been in your
grandfather’s employ, at first one thing and then another, for a year or two, he finally accepted
an advantageous offer, to take charge of a gentleman’s farm, some eight or ten miles from the
city; and we had heard nothing from the family for several months, when, one cold rainy day
in autumn, a wagon was driven up to our front door, containing his remains.  His poor afflicted
wife came with them, and told, that David had said, “Take me to Mr. Charless to bury me.” He
had died of congestive fever.  No doubt but that it was a comfort to the poor fellow in his
dying hour to feel that in this distant land of strangers, he had found a friend who would
not neglect “the widow and the fatherless in their affliction,” and his confidence was not
misplaced, for, from the time of his death, his family lived near us, and never knew, as long
as David’s good friend lived, what it was to want a friend indeed.

Another anecdote of the poor just occurs to my mind, and as it exhibits your grandfather in
another light, I will relate it. Immediately after dinner, on a pleasant day, my two sisters-in-law,
who resided together, less than a square from us, came over to our house, with a man, who had
just applied to them for assistance.  They were deeply interested in behalf of this poor fellow,
who was a Frenchman, and “Frenchmen,” they said, “were not apt to beg unless in real want.”
They were sure he was an honest man.  One of my sisters was a French Creole, and both were
new beginners in active effort for the benefit of the indigent, and did not know exactly the
best method of relieving the unfortunate man, “who had just arrived and had a poor sick wife
and six little children on the boat at the wharf.  A kind-hearted gentleman had offered them
a home at his farm in Illinois, a few miles from the river, and all he wished was money sufficient
to hire a horse and wagon in which to move his helpless family.”  While the ladies were presenting
his case to me, the Frenchman manifested great anxiety, and made the most touching appeals
in the piteous expression of his face and manner. Presently, my husband, who had been indulging
in his usual siesta, awoke and came down stairs.  “Now, the poor fellow can tell his own story,”
and “Mr. Charless” was pathetically appealed to, to listen to his tale of woe.  Unfortunately
for the man he was immediately recognized by your grandfather, who had but a short time before
given him a cup of coffee, etc., from the kitchen, and had also procured work for him as a
day laborer in a factory, which mode of subsistence not suiting the Frenchman’s taste, he had
slipped out of, and ran off, before commencing work.  It was soon evident, from the juxtaposition
of the two, one as accusant, the other defendant, which was not to be mistaken, even by a person
ignorant of the language in which they spoke, that all was not right.  His friends, the ladies,
stared, when, upon each renewed attempt to convict him, he would assure, in the most self-possessed
and polite manner, “Your are mistaken, Monsieur, I have no doubt but that the man to whom you
refer, was very like me, but not myself, I assure you, sir.”  Whereupon your grandfather proposed
to accompany him to the boat for the purpose of seeing his family, promising to procure him
a wagon and every thing necessary for their comfort and removal.  But they had not gone far
before the Frenchman began to sidle off, as it to turn a corner, but finding that it was no
easy matter to get away from the persevering gentleman, who insisted upon being “introduced
to the Madame,” he made a clean breast of the whole thing, “Monsieur, I have no wife and little
children, but you know when a poor man want he get nothing from the ladies unless he have one
sick wife, and some poor little children.  Excuse me, Monsieur, I mean no disrespect to you.”
No one liked a joke better than your grandfather, and being something of a tease too, he more
than once slily referred to the pitiable condition of the poor Frenchman, which, although enjoyed
by others, was not quite so keenly relished by the ladies, who had manifested so much interest
in the welfare of the honest man, and his distressed family.

You are not old enough, my dear little children, to remember how devotedly fond “Grandpa” was
of children, and how they all loved him, notwithstanding he was always playing some trick upon
them.  Sometimes at dinner when any of your little cousins were with us and would show by the
interest expressed in their faces, when the dessert was being brought in, how eager they were
to be “helped,” “Grandpa” would quietly and gravely say, “’Aunty,’ you needn’t give Peter (or
perhaps it might be Charless) any of that, he is not fond of ‘Charlotte Russe,’” (or whatever
the nice thing might happen to be), when Peter, taken aback, half believing, half doubting,
would present such a ludicrous picture, by the mingled expression of his countenance that no
one present, not even little Peter himself, (when he found out it was all a joke), could avoid
a hearty laugh.  And thus with a thousand little ways which fascinated the children he was
decidedly a favorite among them.  He never forgot what he liked, and how he felt, when a boy,
and could easily enter into the feelings of a boy and be a sympathizing friend and companion.

I know some little boys whose parents lived on Pine Street, and although this was by no means
the direct road from “the garden,” they used to watch for “dear Mr. Charless’” return from
that oft-frequented place in the cool of the evening, for he would be sure to come that way
and stop a minute to fill their hats with peaches or apples, etc.  One of these little boys,
attracted one evening by a glorious sunset, which stretched its golden streaks and varied hues
far and wide, lighting up the azure blue with unusual brilliancy and beauty, asked, “Mamma,
is n’t that like heaven?”  “Something like it, I expect, my son.” “There’s where good Mr. Charless
will go, when he dies!” said the little boy.  And thus it was, even children felt the influence
of such a godly life, as that of your beloved grandfather.

The marriage of your dear mother, and the necessity of her being so far separated from the
home of her parents, away here in Louisiana, where there is no Protestant Church, and among
strangers, whose isolated lives throw an almost impassable barrier in the way of social intercourse,
made it incumbent on me to remain with her a greater part of the time.  Your father gave your
mother’s parents a very cordial and pressing invitation to spend their winters with them, promising
that they would always pass the summer with us, and that we should never be separated from
our precious only child.  But the business relations of your grandfather made it impossible
for him to do more than to pay a visit of five or six weeks during the winter; but with the
tender feeling of the father he was willing to submit to the self-denial of separation from
his wife, that she might be with the darling of their united hearts.  In one of his letters
he says, “You ask me, in your last, how I am getting on, I must be honest and say, bad enough.
If I were not tied hand and foot I would cut loose from these cold regions and lonely habitations,
and fly away to my ‘ain wifey, and my ain bairns’ in the sunny south.”  Again he says, when
longing to see me, “But I would not have you come too soon, as I know how changeable March
and April are here, and how delightful they must be in Louisiana.”  At another time he says,
“Kiss Louis, Lizzie and the babies for me, and believe me that whatever claims business or
other ties, may have one me, my heart is ever with my dear ones.”

In the winter of 1855 he was elected “President of the Bank of Missouri.”  I find among my
newspaper slips, an article relative to that fact which I will copy:  “We announced in our
article of Friday last that the name of Joseph Charless, Esq., would probably pass through
the Legislature, as the new President of the 'Bank of the State of Missouri.’  The Telegraph
of this morning announces his election to that important post.

“It is proper for us to say to our distant readers, who Mr. Charless is, and we shall assume
to speak of his capacity for the important post confided to him, by the Legislative wisdom
of the State.

“The Bank of Missouri is a State institution; were it otherwise we question whether we would
refer to the matter at all.  It is also by the wisdom of our fathers constituted (vide the
Constitution) a monopoly, a moneyed monopoly too, and therefore, wields great power, and it
is important to the people of this State to know in whose hands this great moneyed power is
to be vested for the next two years, by the act of Legislature, if (perchance) the Bank is
not turned into a private corporation, by act of Assembly, with the concurrence of private
stockholders.  We do not intend to tire our readers with a ‘long yarn,’ and therefore proceed
to say, that, Mr. Charless has lived, man and boy, in this State and in this city 45 years,
being the worthy son of a most respected sire, and is now about 50 years of age. Mr. Charless
is a gentleman of fair financial ability, and has managed his own private affairs in the prosecution
of a large business, with prudence, skill and judgment, and the firm, of which he is head,
enjoys a high credit, both at home and abroad.

“He is a gentleman, too, of great suavity of manner, and exhibits a kind spirit in all his
intercourse with men (a good quality for the post he is called to) and withal is a man of great
firmness of purpose, not stubborn, of indomitable industry, perseverance and energy, and even
in moneyed panics (the worst of all panics) would probably be as calm as a summer morning,
while at the same time he would act, and act, too, efficiently, looking to the interest and
safety of the corporation of which he is the head, and to the interests of the mercantile and
trading community, at the same time.

“The private character of the new President is beyond reproach, he is a gentleman of unwavering
integrity, and possesses the confidence of his fellow-citizens in an eminent degree.  To use
the western phrase, he is ‘very popular,’ but we don’t esteem this of much account. It is an
idle wind, and may blow south or north to-morrow and proves nothing.

“The new President, however, has not only a good character but a good reputation, and whether
he will mar or advance the latter during his presidency, time only can determine.”

“Reputation” based upon such a characters as his, could not be marred.  But, ah! it was as
President of this Bank, he was brought into contact with the wretched being who has robbed
the world of a benefactor, and where can I find a word in which to embody an idea of the loss
of those he so dearly loved.

He served two years in the State Bank, at which time the term expired, and he determined to
be no longer tied down to St. Louis, more than was necessary to attend to his own business.
But in the formation of the “Mechanics’ Bank” the Board of Directors insisted upon have Mr.
Charless for their President.  He refused positively, but they still insisted; and, at length,
urgently requested that he would accept the presidency of this new institution until fairly
established, if for no longer time.  He finally acceded to the latter proposition.  But after
once getting in, there was no getting out of it; for he found the gentlemen with whom he was
there associated so very congenial, and his duties not onerous but pleasant, so that he continued
to serve them until the day of his death, having signed the last notes on the 1st of June.

It only remains for me to say, my dear children, that after the marriage of your mother, the
summers were our gala time, for Lizzie and the boys and grandma were all at home, and happy
Grandpa would in his excess of joy forget the lonely winters, which he had endeavored by constant
occupation at the store, the bank, and in the Church, to make the best of.  His evenings were
spent in reading, and in holding communion, by letter writing, with his loved ones far away:
which, excepting on Church evenings, he would occasionally vary by a visit to some friend,
of whom, I need not say, he had many, who would have esteemed it a privilege, during my absence,
to have admitted him into their family circle as a member, but, as he often said, in his letters,
he preferred to visit friends, and make his home in the old familiar spot, where he could so
readily call up to his mind the earthly idols of his heart.

I shall ever be thankful, to the Ruler of all events, that I was with him during the whole
winter immediately preceding his death.  We accompanied our daughter and her three little boys
to their home in Louisiana in December; staid two weeks with them, and returned together, fully
determined to be no more separated; that, in future, together we would visit our children,
and together return to our lonely home.  For the light that had gone out when our daughter
married, was no more kindled in our aching hearts, notwithstanding the joy we felt in the possession
of our precious little grandchildren.  In earlier life when we pictured to ourselves a green
old age, with our “bairn and bairn’s bairns” about us, it was a different scene from the reality
when it came with its long separations and anxieties.

Our greatest solace during this last winter of our pilgrimage together, was the service of
our God.  And oh, with what gratitude I shall ever remember His loving kindness and tender
mercies towards us. “He leadeth us in ways we know not of.”  He can comfort in the darkest hour.

The spring came, and with it, a month or two earlier than usual, our beloved ones returned
to the longed for homestead, around which were so many tender recollections of a happy, very
happy life.  How your dear mother clung to that precious father!  How she feasted upon his
every look.  She followed him every where; in his rides, in his strolls through the garden.
She accompanied him at night, and at all times to Church, preferring (when we did not ride)
to take the long walk with “father” to going with “mother” across the street to “the Second
Church.”  When business called him away from his much prized domestic circle, she would walk,
with her arm wrapped around him, to the door, and follow him with her eyes down the street
until out of sight.  After her return home that spring, when she first saw his portrait, that
he had had taken for her, she wept, and could not tell why, except that it was “faultless.”

And now, my dear children, I am treading so closely upon that last morning, that I begin to
tremble.

On Friday, June 3, 1859, your dear grandfather arose early, and drove, as he was wont to do,
to the garden.  While there he gathered and tied together a bunch of flowers for his daughter,
and when I came down stairs to breakfast he was sitting at the window, where he had evidently
read the morning paper and laid it aside, and was enjoying the sports of his little “sonny
boys” who were at play on the grass plot.  I gave him my last “good morning” kiss, little thinking
that in joy our lips would no more be pressed, and turning to the beautiful bouquet, which
was placed in a glass of water at our daughter’s plate, I took it up and admired it.  He had
gathered his first fuchsia to put in her bouquet.

Our last breakfast is over.  At worship little Charless seated himself opposite his grandpa,
and observed him attentively as he read the Bible and one of the metre Psalms. There might be
some decent man named the same. But he was one of these here artist fellows and had come into
the hills to paint, he said."

A smothered exclamation burst from the listener.

Mr. Matthews, not noticing, continued: "He sure did make a lot of pictures and they seemed mighty
nice to us, 'though of course we didn't know nothin' about such things. There was one big one
he made of Maggie that was as natural as life. He was always drawin' of her in one way or another,
and had a lot of little pictures that didn't amount to much, and that he didn't never finish.
But this big one he worked at off and on all summer. It was sure fine, with her a standin'
by the ranch spring, holdin' out a cup of water, and smilin' like she was offerin' you a drink."

It
was well that the night had fallen. At Old Matt's words the stranger shrank back in his chair,
his hand raised as if to ward off a deadly blow. He made a sound in his throat as if he would
cry out, but could not from horror or fear. But the darkness hid his face, and the mountaineer,
with mind intent upon his story, did not heed.

"He took an old cabin at the foot of the hill near where the sheep corral is now, and fixed it
up to work in. The shack had been built first by old man Dewey, him
that the mountain's named after.

It was down there he painted the big picture of her a standin' by the big spring. We never
thought nothin' about her bein' with him so much. Country folks is that way, Mr. Howitt, 'though
we ought to knowed better; we sure ought to knowed better." The old giant paused and for some
time sat with his head bowed, his forgotten pipe on the floor.

"Well," he began again; "he stopped with us all that summer, and then one day he went out as usual and
didn't come back. We hunted the hills out for signs, thinkin' maybe he met up with some trouble.
He'd sent all his pictures away the week before, Jim Lane haulin'
them to the settlement for him.

"The girl was nigh about wild and rode with me all durin' the hunt,
and once when we saw some buzzards circlin', she gave a little cry
and turned so white that I suspicioned maybe she got to thinkin' more
of him than we knew. Then one afternoon when we were down yonder in
the Hollow, she says, all of a sudden like, 'Daddy, it ain't no use
a ridin' no more. He ain't met up with no trouble. He's left all the
trouble with us.' She looked so piqued and her eyes were so big and
starin' that it come over me in a flash what she meant.

Letter Fifteen

My Dear Grandchildren:

It has been nearly two years since I last wrote to you, since which time, war has desolated
our once prosperous and happy country, and drenched its soil with the blood of her sons.  All
has been excitement and turmoil.  Many widows and orphans have been made-–and the wail of anguish
has been poured into the ear of the God of Sabbath. But I turn from the revolting facts which
belong to the history of the nation–-to consider the last sad hours of your revered grandfather,
and to copy for your instruction and admonition his dying words.

After having seen something of his daily walk through life, thought upon his sad and unexpected
death, and in imagination mingled with the throng that followed him to his last resting place-–your
mind will naturally revert to the lonely homestead and its desolate inmates. But words cannot
picture the anguished of our hearts, the gloom and loneliness of our home--after the last relic
of its light and glory had passed away from our view.  So you will follow me, my dear children,
to that little store on Market Street; look upon the bare floor, and behold your grandfather-–the
gentle and loving man, in his dying agony!  Listen to his words.

He knew he was dying, for he said, in answer to a hope expressed, that he might live–-“No,
no, no!  I am a dead man.”  After a pause he uttered, fervently, “Lord Jesus, come quickly.”

Again, said he, “I am a great sinner.”  Some one directed him to look to Jesus.  “I do look
to him.  He is my all.  He is very precious to my soul.”

Again, he said, “I deserve all I suffer, for I am a great sinner.”

I heard all this, but do not know how long I had been by him, when he said to me, “Charlotte,
I have loved you always-–dearly loved you–-and I love you to the end.”  Then turning his eye
towards your father, who was on the opposite side of him, said he, “Louis, I leave my family
to you–-my wife I leave to you.”

Some gentleman came up and asked, “Mr. Charless, who shot you?” He replied, “A man by the name
of Thornton.  I was called upon to testify against him in court last fall.  While President
of the Bank of Missouri, he brought me some bank notes to redeem.  They were stained and had
the appearance of having been buried.  I asked him where he got those notes.  He replied, he
had bought them from some boatmen, who said they had found them under a stump, which had been
pulled up from a boat having been tied to it.  I told him that was a very unlikely story. The
little confidence he placed in the power of medicine made him reluctantly comply with the
wishes of his friends, that he should take the opinion of Doctor Haygarth. Yet he was not
without hope of alleviation to his complaints from change of air; and, therefore, removed
from Bath to the house of his son-in-law, Mr. Bosanquet, in Wiltshire. Here having at first
revived a little, he soon relapsed, and declining gradually, expired
in the eighty-first year of his age, without apparent suffering, in
the possession of his intellectual powers, and, according to the tender
wish of Pindar for one of his patrons--

[Greek: huion, psaumi, paristamenon,]

in
the midst of his children.

He was buried in the parish church of Walcot, in the city of Bath, in the same vault with his
fourth daughter the wife of Rear-Admiral Sotheby, and her two infant
children.

A cenotaph has been erected to his memory among the poets of his country in Westminster Abbey, by his
eldest son, the Rev. Christopher Anstey, with the following inscription:--

M.S. Christopheri Anstey, Arm. Alumni Etonensis, Et Collegii Regalis apud Cantabrigienses olim
Socii, Poetae, Literis elegantioribus adprime ornati, Et inter principes
Poetarum, Qui in eodem genere floruerunt, Sedem eximiam tenentis.

Ille annum circiter MDCCLXX. Rus suum in agro Cantabrigiensi Mutavit Bathonia, Quem locum ei
praeter omne dudum arrisisse Testis est, celeberrimum illud Poema, Titulo inde ducto insignitum:
Ibi deinceps sex et triginta annos commoratus, Obiit A.D. MDCCCV.
  Is there no hope?”  “No
hope here,” replied my husband, “but a bright hope beyond!”

Thank God! for the bright hope which I have that they met again, not, as then, in sorrow, but
in the full enjoyment of the blissful presence of the adorable Jesus!  But, come back my thoughts
from that joyous abode, to the once happy little earthly home, I used to have, and go with
me, dear children, to the same parlors, where your dear mother has had so much pleasure in
the days of her youth, and behold, laid on a narrow couch, in agony and blood, that noble form.
The beloved and admired of all who knew him.  The rooms, the halls, are filled with anxious
friends, but stillness reigns.  Not a sound is heard save the involuntary groans of the dying
Christian.  In the midst of them he would sometimes exclaim, “God have mercy upon me a sinner!”

Through that long dark day, little was said.  After many paroxysms of intense pain, Mr. McPheeters
said, “Mr. Charless, you know something now about the sufferings of Jesus.”  “Yes,” he faintly
replied, “I have been thinking about that, while lying here.”

Again, Mr. McPheeters repeated, “Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me.”  In
broken accents he replied, “Nevertheless not my will, but Thine be done.”

Several times, looking full in my face, said he, “I love you.”

Once, with some difficulty, as if to leave his blessing, he placed his hand upon the head of
your poor mother, and said, “My precious daughter.”

Again and again he uttered, “My poor wife.” He well knew how desolate his poor wife would be
in this bleak world without him.

Towards the close of his sufferings, said he, “Will my heart strings never break?  ‘Not my
will but thine be done.’”

When he was almost gone, he whispered to me, “I–-love--you.”

His last words were, “I am satisfied.”

PEACEFULLY HE LIVED-–PEACEFULLY HE DIED!

And now, my dear children, I have but little more to say.  It has been a hard struggle for
me to write much that I have written; for it seemed like tearing open my heart.  But the ardent
desire that the virtues of my husband should not die out as his name has done, and the fear
that, as one by one of those who knew and loved him, should be laid in the grave, and the bare
fact that he was murdered only remain, a blush might tinge your cheeks, at the mention of his
name, lest the ancestor, who thus fell, might by his evil deeds have provoked his untimely
end.  I have often felt, too, while penning these letters, it is useless; my grandchildren
will perhaps never even take the pains to read them, and if read they may not be impressed
by them or stimulated to a single effort, to imitate the being I so much love and admire, and
whose blood still flows in their own veins.

One of the few friends to whom I communicated my intention to write this sketch, and for whose
opinion I have a high regard, wrote me as follows:

“Do not suffer yourself to forget that when your grandchildren shall have become old enough
to understand what you write, the present and the future will be the object of their interest,
not the past and the dead.  They will be unlike humanity, if they take any interest, in what
so much interests you.  I very much fear that your labors will wholly fail of accomplishing
the good your earnest and loving heart intends.”

In the same letter he also expresses a fear that it will be impossible for me to make any attempt
of the kind which will not be a very partial one.  In reference to this, he says:

“The memory comes insensibly to dwell on all that was agreeable, and to intensify it; impartiality
ceases; and the almost certain result is, a picture which all who read it, having known the
object, see to be colored by the hand of love.”

If I had not already written twelve or thirteen letters before this damper to my efforts came
to hand; I do not know that I would have had the courage to proceed, and I am now gratified
to see, in reperusing the letters of condolence which we received after the death of your grandfather,
that they, no less than the public manifestations of the community where he lived and died,
corroborate what I have said in relation to him.  Of the forty-seven letters received from
friends, from every part of the country, there is but one opinion.  All speak of him as an
uncommon man, whose loss is irreparable.  I will copy a few extracts from these letters, scarcely
knowing, however, which to select, so full they all are of praises of him, whose memory, I
humbly pray, his children may ever cherish as their richest earthly inheritance.

A gentleman of Cincinnati writes: “After the first stunning realization of the horrible crime
of which your dear and universally beloved husband has been the victim, we continue to ask
ourselves, if such a man is murdered, who can be safe?  A man so kind, so just, so gentle,
so good.  I never knew a man whose whole life and character would have seemed a better guarantee
against all violence, even of feeling.”

A lady, who had passed the greater part of her life in St. Louis, writes to my brother Henry,
from “East Rockport.”  She says, (after an expression of her heart-felt sympathy for him, and
for the bereaved wife and child): “St. Louis has not been alone in her just indignation and
horror at the cruel and ruthless deed committed on one of her principal streets; the bitter
lament she so recently sent forth to all parts of the country has been re-echoed back again
by many hearts and voices, that never knew our poor friend.  May I not then, who have known
him from his early youth, be permitted to bear my testimony to his many excellencies of character,
so justly portrayed by his own Pastor, and others, with whom he was associated?  Yes! there
is but one voice on that subject, as there should be but one earnest wish, by all who mourn
this sad event, ‘May I die the death of the righteous, and may my last end be like his.’  I
know that on the face of the widowed wife and her only child, there rests the expression of
unutterable sorrow, but her Maker is her husband, and her fatherless one, His peculiar care.
The cold grave does not contain the immortal spirit that she saw contending in its agony for
freedom from its clay casket, but it has soared away forever to the fields of light and immortality.
May all with whom he has been associated, and all who shall hereafter learn the history of
his amiable character, of his serene, and exalted piety, his peaceful conscience, and his martyr
death, be so impressed as to join themselves to the ‘followers of the Cross,’ and bear the
same noble testimony to the excellence of our holy religion that our friend, Mr. Charless,
has done.”

Another lady writes, from Cumberland, Penn., thus: “My heart bleeds for you all, for well I
know what a treasure you have lost.  Few persons beyond your family circle had a better opportunity
of knowing your beloved husband, and none, I venture to say, loved and admired him more.  The
world at large knew and valued him as a noble Christian gentleman, as a man of sterling integrity,
and enlarged benevolence, but who could understand all his excellence and all his loveliness,
but those who have been privileged, as I have so often been, to see him in the sweet relations
of husband and father, to bow with him at his family altar, and to hear the fervent, yet humble,
outpourings of the Christian heart before the mercy seat?  Ah! well do I remember how tenderly,
how sweetly, his petitions were wont to ascend for me, at the time of my deep and overwhelming
sorrow; and when about to leave his hospitable roof, how affectionately he would commend the
stricken one to our heavenly Father’s gracious care.  These remembrances will linger about
the heart as long as it throbs with life.  Oh! sad, sad is the thought that I shall no more
hear that sweet voice pleading with our Father God in behalf of the sorrowing ones, or for
the Church of God, so dear to his heart, or committing his loved ones into his gracious care;
while, with lowly meekness, he confessed and bewailed his sins, and plead for pardon with a
childlike love and trust in our blessed Saviour.  But oh! delightful thought, his prayers are
now turned to praise.”

I will copy a part of a letter, from a gentleman in the city of New York, to show what kind
of an impression your dear grandfather made upon strangers.

“June 4, 1859."

“Very dear Madam: Although a stranger to you, I cannot repress the expression of the heart-felt
sympathy of myself and my whole family for you in your late terrible bereavement.  Language
is totally at fault in its poverty to convey what we feel, or give words that shall comfort
you in your heavy affliction.  Our acquaintance with your dear husband was recent and short,
but it was long enough to endear him to our hearts in no ordinary way.  We had gone to the
house of God in company, and taken sweet counsel together.  We had mingled our songs of praise
around the domestic altar, and at the same holy place had poured out our united petitions to
God for his blessing on our dear families, as well as on the cause of our divine Master.  Indeed,
I can truly say that our intercourse with your dear husband was all that was sweet and refreshing
to the Christian’s heart, and time can never efface the delightful impression he left in our
family when he took an affectionate leave of us all in order to join you and his dear daughter,
and grandchildren.  Every look and every word as is fresh as yesterday, and his sweet memory
will be cherished by Mrs. S. and myself, and all our children, every one of whom became warmly
attached to him.

“I feel that I am doing that which will re-open the bleeding wound, but I cannot help it, as
my own emotions must have the relief which this note of sympathy only partially affords.  O,
how unspeakably dear to us is the thought of his readiness for the great change, and that he
is now walking those golden streets, and basking in the smiles of his Saviour.  And how consoling
the many sweet assurances of our heavenly Father that he doth not willingly afflict, that all
things work together for good to them that love God, and that as our day is, so shall our strength
be.”

In explanation of your grandfather having been a guest of the gentleman who wrote this letter,
and yet a stranger to him, it may be of interest to you to know, that in the spring of 1859,
just before the return of your dear mother and yourselves to St. Louis, from your Southern
home, he paid a short visit to the city of New York, to attend to some business for the Mechanics’
Bank, which brought him in contact with Mr. S., “President of the Bank of the Republic,” who
gave him a pressing invitation to pass the Sabbath day with him, at his country seat, on the
Hudson river.  He accepted the invitation, accompanied his new made friend on Saturday afternoon,
and returned Monday morning; and was thus made acquainted with a charming family, of whom he
several times spoke in terms of admiration and affection.

A gentleman, residing in the interior of the State of Missouri, says, in a letter to my brother
Taylor: “I cannot in justice to my own feelings refrain from expressing to you the deep, deep
grief I felt at the loss of our dear friend, Mr. Charless.  In all my intercourse with the
world I can safely say that he was the purest and best man I have ever known.  Thousands have
lost their best friend, society one of its brightest ornaments, and his family-–Great God,
how can their loss be described.  I have been proud for twenty years to claim him as my friend,
and if I had no other reason for thinking well of human nature, a knowledge of his character
would be sufficient.  He was a credit to human nature, and I never, sir, expect to meet his
equal again in all that is essential to make a good and true man.”

Another gentleman, who dates his letter, Sarcoxie, June 10, in addressing the same brother,
after offering his sincere condolence to him, and through him to the immediate family of the
deceased, says: “My relations with Mr. Charless it is true were mostly of a business character,
yet a relation of this kind of twenty years standing, could not exist with such a man without
producing feelings of a kindly character. The characters have more the appearance of being broad
caricatures from real life, than the creatures of a rich and teeming invention. They seem rather
the representation of individuals grotesquely designed and extravagantly coloured, than of
classes of men.

His bodily strength now giving way by degrees, while that of his mind remained unimpaired, he expired
at his residence near Leghorn, on the 21st of October, 1771, in the 51st year of his age.

His
mother died a little before him. His widow lived twelve years longer, which she passed at Leghorn
in a state of unhappy dependence on the bounty of the merchants at that place, and of a few friends
in England. Out of her slender means she contrived to erect a monument to her deceased husband,
on which the following inscription from the pen of his friend Armstrong was inscribed:

Hic ossa conduntur TOBIAE SMOLLETT, Scoti; Qui prosapia generosa et antiqua natus, Priscae virtutis
exemplar emicuit; Aspectu ingenue, Corpore valido, Pectore animoso, Indole apprime benigna,
Et fere supra facultates munifica Insignis.

Ingenio feraci, faceto, versatili, Omnigenae fere doctrinae mire capaci, Varia fabularum dulcedine
Vitam moresque hominum, Ubertate summa ludens depinxit. Adverso, interim, nefas! tali tantoque
alumno, Nisi quo satyrae opipare supplebat, Seculo impio, ignavo, fatuo, Quo Musse vix nisi nothae
Maerenatulis Britannicis Fovebantur. In memoriam Optimi et amabilis omnino viri, Permultis
amicis desiderati, Hocce marmor, Dilectissima simul et amantissima conjunx L. M. Sacravit.

A
column with a Latin inscription was also placed to commemorate him on the banks of his favourite
Leven, near the house in which he was born, by his kinsman Mr. Smollett of Bonhill.

The person of Smollett is described by his friend Dr. Moore as stout
and well-proportioned, his countenance engaging, and his manner reserved,
with a certain air of dignity that seemed to indicate a consciousness
of his own powers.

In his disposition, he appears to have been careless, improvident, and sanguine; easily swayed
both in his commendation and censures of others, by the reigning
humour of the moment, yet warm, and (when not influenced by the baneful
spirit of faction) steady in his attachments. On his independence
he particularly prided himself. But that this was sometimes in danger
from slight causes is apparent, from an anecdote related by Dr. Wooll,
in his Life of Joseph Warton.  He whose benefactions,
stimulated into action the earliest impulses that led to the establishing of this institution,
and whose sympathizing heart and ready hand followed us to the end of his life.  He was, as
I have said, an humble man, for he seemed never to forget that he had been redeemed from the
curse of a broken law and was indebted to God, the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, for all that
he had or was.  And to God truly does the glory belong!  Nature had done much for him, but
Grace far more.  And while, my dear children, I would again and again point you to your noble
grandfather as an example worthy of your imitation, I would more earnestly direct your attention
higher still, even to the Great Exemplar whom he followed at so great a distance. Attempt to
compare any human standard, however exalted to this, and it wanes until it ceases to be seen
before the dazzling purity of the Sun of Righteousness!  Man, although he was originally made
pure, has fallen very low in the scale of moral being, on account of sin.  And notwithstanding
he may by nature be endowed with many amiable qualities and many excellencies of character,
the atmosphere of this sinful world is not favorable to their proper development, so that the
virtuous and happy youth, gifted as he may be with intellectual capacity, and having ever so
large a share of moral courage, may yet not be able to resist evil; and at last may become
a bad, and, consequently, a discontented man.  And it is certain, that, although he may live
above reproach before his fellows, and achieve wonders in his career through life, he can never
be noted for true moral excellence without Christianity.

And now, my dear, very dear children, I am done.  But I linger in saying, farewell!  Oh, that
you all, “children, and children’s children, even to the third and fourth generation,” may
be enabled to give your hearts away, in early life, to that blessed Saviour, who alone is able
to fit you for living and for dying, who alone can effectually soothe your sorrows, sweeten
every earthly enjoyment, and impart to you, in the midst of the cares, trials, and dangers
of life, that calm confidence so beautifully expressed by David, “The Lord is my Shepherd,
I shall not want.”

That you may be guided by the precepts of God’s Holy Word, which is so faithfully taught you
from week to week by your own sweet mother, my precious grandchildren, and that the dews of
Divine Grace may distil from heaven upon you, making you true men and women, that you may live
the life of the righteous, and at last be found among those who have washed their robes and
made them white in the blood of the Lamb, is, and ever will be, the sincere and earnest prayer of,

YOUR LOVING GRANDMA,

C. T. CHARLESS.

Belmont, December 24, 1862.

Letter from Rev. S. B. McPheeters, D.D.

Shelby Co., Kentucky, Sept. 5, 1865.

TO THE GRANDCHILDREN OF MR. JOSEPH CHARLESS.

My Dear Young Friends:

Your Grandmother has told me of the letters she has addressed to you, concerning the life of
your Grandfather Charless, giving many incidents and recollections of him, which I doubt not
will be of the greatest interest to you, and to those who will come after you; at her request,
I will also add a letter on the same subject.

Before doing so, however, I wish to say, that as you are all, at the time I am writing, quite
young, and as you will not probably read this until some years are passed, I shall not address
you as small children, but anticipating a little, I will have you in my mind, and address you,
as you will be a few years hence.

I wish very much that I could give you the picture of your Grandfather, as he was, and as he
lives in my memory.  And when I first undertook the pleasant task, so distinct was his whole
character upon my memory, and so dear was the recollection of Mr. Charless to my heart, that
I thought it would be easy to transfer to paper the image that was in my mind.  But I have
not found it so.  I have once and again failed to satisfy myself in efforts I made to draw
his moral and social portrait, nor do I know that I will succeed better now.  But you may ask
what is the difficulty?  I will reply by an illustration from nature.  When one is familiar
with a landscape that is marked by bold mountains, prominent headlands, or rushing torrents,
it is not difficult to describe such scenery so that it is at once recognized. Very different,
however, it is when one attempts to tell in detail, what it is that makes a rich valley, in
a bright spring morning, such an object of beauty and delight to the soul.  There are a thousand
objects too minute for detailed description, which, blended, charm the eye and please the fancy,
and make us exclaim, How beautiful!  The verdant grass, and modest flower, and budding tree,
and singing bird, and genial sun, and balmy air, and light, and shade, all combine to make
a scene, which he who sees it feels, but cannot easily reproduce in the mind of another.  So
it is with Mr. Charless.  That which gave him his peculiar charm was not one or two striking
characteristics which distinguished him from other men, but it was a beautiful combination
of many noble and lovely traits, in proportions so just, and in harmony so pleasing, that when
I have attempted to select this and that characteristic for description, I feel that I have
succeeded about as well, as if I had collected a bouquet from the valley of which I just spoke,
and should give it to a friend as a picture of the landscape itself.  The truth is, my young
friends, you will never truly know your Grandfather unless you are so happy as to meet him
in heaven. And yet this is no reason that you should not desire to know something of him, and
form some true idea of his character.  And it is with the hope that I may add to your pleasure
that I shall try and give you some account of him from my own personal knowledge and intercourse
with him.

My relations to Mr. Charless were intimate for about eight years, I being, during that time,
the Pastor of the Church in which he was a Ruling Elder. But what distinguished him much more was,
that he had attained so great a proficiency in the study of mathematics as to become a teacher
of that branch of science in the English metropolis, under the patronage of Sir Isaac Newton, and
rose to such reputation by his writings, that he attracted the notice
and esteem of the powerful and the learned, and was admitted to the
intimacy of the Earls of Hardwicke, and Macclesfield; Lord Parker,
President of the Royal Society; Halley; Mead; and Samuel Johnson.

By his wife, Mary, the daughter of a cabinet-maker in London, he had two sons, one of whom died
an infant, and a daughter. In three years after the birth of the remaining son, the father himself
died, and left the two children to the protection of their mother. An extraordinary mark of her
presence of mind, sufficiently indicated how capable this mother was of executing the difficult
duty imposed on her by his decease. Dr. Mead had pronounced his case, which was a polypus
on the heart, to be a hopeless one; and her anxious precautions to hinder the fatal intelligence from
reaching him were on the point of being defeated by the arrival of a letter of condolence and
consolation from an injudicious but well-meaning friend, when, on discovering its purport, she
had sufficient address to substitute the lively dictates of her own invention for the real contents
of the epistle, and by this affectionate delusion not merely to satisfy the curiosity but to
cheer the spirits of her dying husband.

So great was her solicitude for the improvement of her son, that she declined the pressing
instances of the Countess of Macclesfield to reside under her roof, lest she should be hindered
from attending exclusively to that which was now become her main concern.

But while so true and valuable a friend, I do not think I ever knew a man who made fewer declarations
or professions of friendship.

You will get a very good idea of your grandfather’s personal appearance from the excellent
portraits of him in the family.  He was slightly above the average height, well developed,
without being corpulent, had a firm elastic step, and motions indicating vigor and health.
His eye was bright, but mild, his features regular and unusually handsome, and his countenance
was habitually lighted up by an intelligence and benignity which gave it a peculiar charm,
and inspired even strangers with a confidence that such a face could not belong to any but
a good and upright man.  Mr. Charless was an exceedingly pleasant companion, and, without being
either brilliant or witty in conversation, his society was courted and his arrival was always
hailed with pleasure by the company in which he mingled, for he brought with him a bright face,
a cheerful heart, a genial humor and hearty cordiality that seemed to diffuse itself through
all around-–children, young people and old people seemed alike to enjoy his society–-yet he
never seemed to me to make an effort to “be agreeable,” he only acted out his natural feelings
and disposition, and this was agreeable.

I hesitate some in describing your grandfather as a very polished and polite man.  I fear you
might put a meaning to those words which would lead you into a wrong view of his character:
there is a polish and politeness that is the result of art and painstaking-–a thing on the
surface-–often a disguise, having its root in expediency, always self-conscious and often selfish-–something
that may please us because it flatters us, but does not win us because we cannot trust it.
Nothing could be more unlike Mr. Charless than this.  Yet there is a polish which flows from
a nice sense of what is fitting and proper to be done in social intercourse, from ease and
self-possession, from a kind heart and desire to make others happy; a politeness that is made
up of a thousand little acts of self-denial for the comfort of others; that does not obtrude
itself upon your notice, but is felt in making you easy; that flows, not from rules, but from
good principles and a generous nature, in this sense Mr. Charless was eminently a polished
and polite man.  I have seen him with persons in humble life, he made them easy and treated
them with kindness.  I have seen him with men of eminent positions and great reputation, he
was at perfect ease himself and commanded their marked respect.

Mr. Charless was not a learned man, and made no pretensions to learning, yet he was remarkably
well informed; kept himself acquainted with the current literature of the day, and conversed
with intelligence and good sense on all matters that came up in general society.  On more than
one occasion he surprised me, by showing an amount and accuracy of acquaintance with subjects
which I had supposed lay out of the range of his investigation, and of which I should never
have known that he had a knowledge had they not casually come up in conversation.  I met him
one day, and after some general conversation he gave me a book, remarking, “Here is a work
to which a friend called my attention.  I have read it with so much pleasure that I sent for
a copy for you.”  When I got home I was surprised to find it an elaborate and scientific treatise
on the nature of the Church, a work which, I venture the assertion, not one layman in five
hundred would have thought of reading, or would have finished if he had begun it.

You will never hear any one who knew your grandfather speak of him without mentioning his great
generosity, liberality and kindness to the poor, but no one will ever be able to tell you how
much he did to alleviate the sorrows of the distressed, or to help the needy, for he did these
things so quietly that none knew it but those received, and Him who sees our secret things;
but in my visits to the poor I have seen the tears start in the eyes of widows and orphans
at the mention of his name, which told better than words who was their friend and benefactor.
Mr. Charless was one of the few men I have ever known who seemed to think, as much as they
should, that the manner of bestowing a benefaction, while it adds nothing to the cost of what
is given, adds immensely to the value of the thing given, in the estimation of those who receive
it.  A friend of mind, who was soliciting funds for a charitable purpose, said to me, as he
returned from an interview with your grandfather, “It is a pleasure to ask a subscription from
Mr. Charless.  He gives as though you conferred a favor on him in affording him the opportunity
of ‘giving.’”  This was very characteristic.

Mr. Charless was a modest and very unassuming man, and never pushed himself forward, yet he
had a just estimate of his abilities, knew what he could do, and when called upon by circumstances,
or by those with whom he acted, to take the lead, if the thing commended itself to his judgment,
without ado or apology, he went forward and did it; and I have often been surprised to see
how much he could accomplish and how well he did what he undertook. If my recollection does not mislead
me, he will be found in some parts of this novel to have had before him the Pharsamond of Marivaux,
another copy of Cervantes. But it does not anywhere like Count Fathom, betray symptoms of being
a mere translation. Sir Launcelot Greaves was first printed piecemeal in the British Magazine, or
Monthly Repository, a miscellany to which Goldsmith was also a contributor. It has the recommendation
of being much less gross and indelicate than any other of his novels.

During the same period, 1761 and 1762, he published, in numbers, four volumes of a Continuation
of his History of England; and in 1765, a fifth, which brought it down to that time.

Not contented with occupation under which an ordinary man would have sunk, he undertook, on the 29th of
May, 1762, to publish the Briton, a weekly paper, in defence of the Earl of Bute, on that day
appointed first commissioner of the treasury; and continued it till the 12th of February in
the ensuing year, about two months before the retirement of that nobleman from office. By his
patron he complained that he was not properly supported; and he incurred the hostility of Wilkes,
who had before been his staunch friend, but who espoused the party in opposition to the Minister,
by an attack, the malignance of which no provocation could have justified.

In 1763, his name was prefixed, in conjunction with that of Francklin,
the Greek professor at Cambridge, and translator of Sophocles and
Lucian, to a version of the works of Voltaire, in twenty-seven volumes.
To this he contributed, according to his own account, a small part,
including all the notes historical and critical. To the Modern Universal
History, which was published about the same time, he also acknowledged
himself to be a contributor, though of no very large portion.

You will often hear from those who knew your grandfather speak of his great kindness, his habitual
placidity of temper, and uncommon sweetness of disposition, and all this was eminently true
of him; but if you are led by such accounts to think of him as in any degree what is called
a yea-nay sort of character, or as destitute of spirit, or even incapable of passion, you will
make a great mistake.  He was not at all deficient in firmness, and had not only moral but
physical courage in an eminent degree.  As he never wantonly gave so he never tamely brooked
an indignity.  His eye could flash as well as laugh.  I was one day conversing pleasantly with
him in his private office in the Bank, of which he was President.  A gentleman came in, evidently
in a pet, and addressing Mr. Charless, spoke in a very harsh way, and with broad insinuations
against one of the Bank Directors, in relation to some transaction.  Before he had well finished
his invective Mr. Charless rose to his feet, his eye kindling, every feature of his faced marked
by sternness, and replied, “Sir, the gentleman of whom you speak is my personal friend.  The
charge you bring against him is not true; the facts were these (mentioning them concisely but
clearly), and now, sir, you must retract what you have said.”  The gentleman evidently taken
aback, both Mr. Charless’ statement of the case, and manner, immediately calmed down, made
an explanation and withdrew.  I could not resist a hearty laugh at the storm which had so suddenly
burst upon us and had been as suddenly quelled, and turning to him said, “Mr. Charless, I had
no idea you had so much pluck.”  He joined the laugh and said, “My Irish will sometimes come
up.  Besides,” he added, more gravely, “that man took no pains to learn the facts of the case,
and has a way of bullying that I wanted to put a stop to.”

Few men had a keener relish for what was humorous or enjoyed a laugh better than Mr. Charless,
and with little children he was playful and would sometimes even join in their sports, and
if he did not join them he would look on and seemed to relish with great zest their pranks
and joyous shouts and gambols.  Perhaps some persons would not have mentioned such a trait
of character, as it might seem to imply a want of dignity.  I beg leave to differ from such.
There is a dignity of manner and a dignity of character, not only quite separable, but often
separated.  I have known men who had great dignity of manner and very little dignity of character,
and they are to me among the most irksome of mortals.  Mr. Charless, while not deficient in
dignity of manner, when occasion called for it, was truly dignified in character.  The one
he might drop for a little while, the other he never dropped.  The children, with whom he might
sport or familiarly talk, respected him just as much as if he had the manner of a Judge on
the bench, and then they loved him far better; and there was to me in these occasional overflowings
of a genial nature, this return of youthful feeling in mature manhood, this sympathy with children,
something very beautiful. It showed how large his heart was, how little he been soured or soiled
by contact with the world, how broad, and healthy and true a nature God had endowed him with.
The very same large humanity that disposed him to enter into the sports of children led him
also to help the widow, to befriend the friendless and soothe the sorrowing.

I have said nothing yet about your grandfather’s religious character, and yet this was by far
his greatest excellence.  He was truly and sincerely pious.  By which I mean he truly loved,
trusted in, and obeyed Christ.  But, although I am a preacher, I do not intend to write you
a sermon, and I hope you will not take it as so intended, in what I am about to say to you
of the religious character of Mr. Charless.  I esteem it by far your greatest loss, in his
death before you were old enough to understand him, that you are deprived of the means of learning
something about true religion as it was exemplified in him.

Most young people, if not pious themselves, have an idea that religion is in its nature gloomy,
or at least that it would interfere with the happiness and vivacity of youth.  I know this,
for I once thought and felt so myself.  And it is just to correct this that I so much regret
that you did not know your grandfather Charless; you could not have known him without knowing
that he was truly pious, nor could you have helped seeing that he was a happy man, and that
his religion, yes, his religion, so far from interfering with, promoted his happiness. You
may meet with other examples, but you will rarely find one so striking as his.  And I hold,
as a matter of fairness, that religion should be judged by just such examples.  I know that
there are truly pious persons who are not attractive, who are melancholy, or who are sometimes
even repulsive in their characters.  Do you ask, Why not judge the effect of religion from
these as well as from better and more pleasing cases?  My reply is: What you see and judge
may not be religion at all.  In the repulsive it may be only the coarse, rough natural character;
with the melancholy it may be dyspepsia.  You do not form your estimate of what the glorious
light of the sun does in gladdening and beautifying the earth, by its vain struggles with mists
and fogs; it may fail to make a potato patch sublime or grand, and yet be in itself both sublime
and grand. From the time that he left London, in 1774, till his death, a period of 46 years, he
was seldom long absent from his home, first at Eartham, and afterwards at Felpham, a pleasant
village on the sea-shore, distant only a few miles from his former residence.
  So, precisely, in fairness,
you should judge religion.  Hence I insist that men like Mr. Charless are examples by which
religion should be judged.  Nature did much for him, made him generous and kind, gave him a
large heart and noble impulses.  Grace elevated, strengthened, purified all these natural qualities,
and brought him in harmony and fellowship with God; set before him, as an object of love, confidence,
and imitation, the blessed Saviour; gave him a hope which earthly losses could not dim, and
a peace which they only know who have felt it.  Why should it not have added to his happiness?
Had he lived he would have told you himself that what real happiness he had in this life came
more from his religion than all other sources. This, though not unexceptionable, and particularly
in the last verse, has yet a tenderness and spirit utterly wanting in Mason.

What from my power would Sappho claim? Who scorns thy flame? What wayward boy Disdains to yield
thee joy for joy?  How often Mr. Charless brought those words to
my mind; and as I used to see him coming from home, with such a cheerful, happy face, as I
saw how good men and wicked men respected and honored him, I have said to myself over and often:
His Father who seeth in secret is rewarding him openly.  In truth this passage was so associated
with Mr. Charless in my mind, that I do not know that I have read these words for a number
of years before his death and since without thinking of him as a striking illustration of its
truth and beauty.

