In the evolution of aviation during the war the conclusion has been reached that the most remarkable
lines of development at the Armistice were in the direction of ground and night fighting, torpedo
attack and long-range bombing, exemplifying respectively the three spheres of air operations--military
co-operation, naval co-operation, and the strategic use of aircraft. It must be remembered
that this progress in tactics and strategy, in the machine, and the airman's skill, was made
in the short period of four years, and that every war has started with a great advance in scientific
knowledge, accumulated during peace, over that obtaining at the close of the previous war.
We may therefore assume, provided the danger is averted of a retrograde movement from recent
scientific methods to pre-war conditions--sabres, bayonets, and guns--that by the outbreak
of another war on a large scale, which we hope may never occur, the knowledge of Service aeronautics
will have increased immeasurably since 1918, and may be, not a contributory, but a decisive
factor in securing victory.

The period since the Armistice has been employed in the reduction and consolidation of the
Royal Air Force. In England the cadre system has been adopted, while abroad the greatest concentration
of effort is aimed at, with Egypt, at present the most important strategic point in the Imperial
air system, as the centre of activity. Iraq is being handed over to the control of the Royal
Air Force, whose share in the policing of overseas possessions is likely usefully to grow provided
any tendency to the concurrent building up of a large ground organization is withstood. The
advantages of aircraft for "garrison" duties lie, under suitable geographical conditions, in
their swift action and wide range, their economy, and, during disturbances their capacity for
constant pressure against the enemy without fear of retaliation. One of the main problems is
at present that of personnel. Service flying is restricted to comparatively young men, and
therefore the majority of officers can only be commissioned for short periods. For this reason
the experiment is being made of taking officers direct from civil life on short engagements,
and at the same time endeavouring to ensure, by technical and general education, that the Royal
Air Force shall not become a blind-alley occupation.

Though it is difficult to foretell on what lines aircraft will develop for any one purpose,
as in the past, the problem of military co-operation will perhaps be less complex than that
of co-operation with the Navy. It will probably consist of improvements along the lines already
indicated, such as increased range, speed, climb, man[oe]uvrability, offensive armament, armour,
the assistance of tank and anti-tank action, and the utilization of gas. Fighting will undoubtedly
take place at very high altitudes to keep the enemy's fighting machines away from the zone
of operations--necessitating the development of the single-seater so as to increase climb and
man[oe]uvrability, and obtain, if possible, a speed of 200 miles an hour at 30,000 feet. Cavalry,
unless retained, as I think they should be, in the form of mounted machine-gunners, will, I
think, disappear in European warfare, but infantry will remain, and it will be the object of
aircraft to assist their advance by reconnaissance, ground attack, artillery and tank co-operation,
and the destruction of the enemy's supplies and communications. In this connection ground tactics
and air tactics must develop pari passu and commanders of Corps and Armies must work out during
peace training the fullest schemes for the most intimate co-operation between air and land forces.

The future of naval co-operation is a difficult problem, more especially as there was no major
naval engagement after Jutland in which aircraft could be used, and consequently we have little
to go on in estimating their practical value in direct co-operation with the fleet. It is impossible
at present to judge between the conflicting opinions as to the future of the capital ship,
but it is certain that aviation will materially modify naval tactics and construction. Coast
defence, reconnaissance, anti-submarine work, escort, and the bombing of enemy bases, will
doubtless continue and develop with ever-increasing machinery and equipment; but torpedo attack
by aircraft may reach a point where the very existence of opposing fleets may be endangered.
It is already questionable whether a battleship could survive an attack launched by even a
small force of this mobile arm.

As was the case during the war, the action of aircraft at sea is restricted by range, the difficulty
being to find the mean between the opposing conditions of radius of flight and limitation in
the size of aircraft imposed by the deck-space of "carriers," but there is reason to suppose
that on the one hand engines will be so improved as to afford a sufficient radius of action
to comparatively small aircraft, while, on the other, devices will be found to economize deck-space.

Fleets operating near the enemy's coast will be vulnerable from land aircraft bases, and thus
close blockade will be rendered increasingly difficult. The possibility of gas attack on enemy
bases from the air in co-operation with submarines and of effecting a blockade by this means
must be envisaged.

Since the Armistice the operational work of the Royal Air Force on behalf of the Navy has been
conducted under the auspices of the Admiralty. Improvements have been made in large flying
boats and amphibians, especially with a view to facilitating their landing on "carriers" and
the decks of battleships. There has also been considerable progress in the construction and
use of torpedo aircraft.

The war lasted long enough to prove the effect of the strategic offensive by air. In spite
of the dictates of humanity, it cannot be eliminated. It is true that modern war is inimical
to the progress of mankind and brings only less suffering to the victors than to the vanquished.
To ensure peace should therefore be our ideal. But a great war once joined is to-day a war
of peoples. Not only armies in the field, but men, women, and even children at home, are concentrated
on the single purpose of defeating the enemy, and armies, navies, and air forces are dependent
upon the application to work, the output of war supplies, and, above all, the morale of the
civil population. Just as gas was used notwithstanding the Hague Convention, so air war, in
spite of any and every international agreement to the contrary, will be carried into the enemy's
country, his industries will be destroyed, his nerve centres shattered, his food supply disorganized,
and the will power of the nation as a whole shaken. Formidable as is the prospect of this type
of air warfare, it will become still more terrible with the advent of new scientific methods
of life-destruction, such as chemical and bacterial attack on great industrial and political
centres. Various proposals, such as the control of the air effort, service and civil, of all
countries by the League of Nations, and even the complete elimination of aviation, have been
put forward as a means of avoiding the horrors of aerial warfare and its appurtenances, but
they are untenable, and any power wishing and able to sweep them aside will undoubtedly do so.

A future war, as I see it, will begin something after this manner, provided either side possesses
large air forces. Huge day and night bombers will assemble at the declaration of war to penetrate
into the enemy's country for the attack of his centres of population, his mobilization zones,
his arsenals, harbours, strategic railways, shipping and rolling stock. Corps and Army squadrons
will concentrate in formation to accompany the armies to the front; reconnaissance and fighting
patrols will scatter in all directions from coastal air bases to discover the enemy's concentrations
and cover our own; the fleet, whatever its nature, will emerge with its complement of reconnaissance
and protective machines and torpedo aircraft for direct action against the enemy's fleet. A
few fighting defence units will remain behind.

But it must not be imagined that these functions will be carried out unopposed. Local battles
in the air will occur between fighting machines for the protection of specialized machines,
while the main air forces in large formations will concentrate independently to produce, if
possible, a shattering blow on the enemy and obtain from the outset a supremacy in the air
comparable to our supremacy on the sea in the last war.

In mobilization the time factor is all-important. Our national history has been one of extraordinary
good fortune in this respect, but the margin allowable for luck is becoming very narrow and,
whereas in 1914 it was some twenty days between the declaration of war and the exchange of
the first shots, in the next war the air battle may be joined within as many hours, and an
air attack launched almost simultaneously with the declaration of war. In modern war the mobilization
period tends to shorten, and every effort will be made towards its further reduction, since
mobilizing armies are particularly vulnerable from air attack.

CIVIL AVIATION AS A FACTOR IN NATIONAL SECURITY.

The picture I have drawn may appear highly coloured for the reason that no country is likely
for some time to possess sufficiently large air forces to obtain a decisive victory, or at
any rate an uncontested superiority, at the outbreak of war. Though in air, as in every other
form of warfare, attack is more effective than defence, we cannot afford to keep our air forces
up to war strength in peace any more than our Army or Navy.

The problem, from a military point of view, is therefore to ensure an adequate reserve and
to maintain our capacity for expansion to meet emergencies. The number of units maintained
at war establishment should be the absolute minimum for safety and of the type immediately
required on mobilization, i.e. long-range bombing and naval reconnaissance squadrons. The remainder
should be in cadre form. We can, of course, maintain a fixed number of machines and pilots
in reserve for every one on the active list, but, although some such system is necessary, on
a large scale it is open to many and serious objections. First of all, even on a cadre basis,
it means keeping inactive at considerable cost a number of machines which may never be used
and which, however carefully stored, quickly deteriorate. Knowledge of aeronautics is still
slender and improvements are made so continuously that machines may become obsolete within
a few months. Moreover, the growth of service aviation in peace must tend to become artificial
and conventional rather than natural, and this will react on design and construction, which
will be cramped, both technically and financially, within the limits imposed by service requirements.

It is obvious therefore that the capacity of the construction industry to expand cannot be
fostered by service aviation alone; furthermore, in the event of another war of attrition,
expansion will be more essential than any amount of machine reserve power immediately available,
and in the event of a war of short duration that power will win which has the greatest preponderance
of machines, service or civil, fit to take the air. The asphyxiation of a large enemy city,
if within range, can be done by night-flying commercial machines, and it would require a defending
force of great numerical superiority for its successful defence.

Whether, therefore, from this point of view, or others, which I will mention later, another
solution must be found, and this lies in the development of civil aviation. An analogy in the
Navy and the Mercantile Marine has long been apparent. "Sea power," says Mahan, "is based upon
a flourishing industry." Substitute "air" for "sea" and the analogy is still true. The Navy
owed its origin to our mercantile enterprise and to-day it depends upon the Mercantile Marine
for its reserve power of men and material. In the same way must air power be built up on commercial
air supremacy. If we accept Mahan, or the dictum of any other great naval or military historian
or strategist, a service air force by itself is not air power, and after a brief if brilliant
flash must wither if reserves are not immediately at hand. A large commercial air fleet will
provide, not only a reserve of men and machines, but it will keep in existence an aircraft
industry, with its designing and constructional staffs, capable of quick and wide expansion
in emergency; and such an industry will not be employed on the design of contrivances for use
in a possible war, but on meeting the practical requirements of everyday air transport and
navigation.

Thus a natural, practical and healthy, as opposed to a stereotyped and artificial, growth will
be ensured. Our naval supremacy is largely attributable to the interest which the people as
a whole have traditionally taken in naval policy; in other words, to the fact that we are a
seafaring nation. Similarly air supremacy can only be secured if the air-sense of the man in
the street is fostered, and aviation is not confined to military operations, but becomes a
part of everyday life. At the present time commercial aviation is far too small to play the
part of reservoir to the Royal Air Force--an object which must constitute one of the principal
claims for support of the nucleus already in existence.

CIVIL AVIATION AS AN INSTRUMENT OF IMPERIAL PROGRESS.

Civil aviation, however, has not only an indirect military, but, with its superiority in speed
over other means of transport, a direct commercial utility. The nation which first substitutes
aircraft for other means of transport will be more than half-way towards the supremacy of the
air. Moreover, as the Roman Empire was built upon its roads and as the foundations of the British
Empire have hitherto rested upon its shipping, as steam, the cable and wireless have each in
turn been harnessed to the work of speeding up communications, so to-day, with the opening
of a new era of Imperial co-operation and consultation, this new means of transport by air,
with a speed hitherto undreamed of, must be utilized for communication and commerce between
the various portions of the Empire.

A comparison of the French and British attitudes towards civil aviation clearly demonstrates
the two policies I have mentioned. Both France and England grant subsidies--France the very
much larger sum--but the great difference lies in the objects aimed at. French policy is fostering
civil aviation as a part of its military policy and, a portion of the subsidy being given to
machines fulfilling service requirements, there is a strong tendency for French civil aviation
to be military air power camouflaged. British policy, on the other hand, should aim at fostering
civil aviation primarily as a commercial concern and believes that air commerce is the basis
of air power as a whole. We are prepared to face the tendency of military and civil machines
to diverge if that divergence is essential to the commercial machine.

An alternative to the British policy of maintaining a small air force and fostering commercial
aviation as a reserve is the Canadian plan of a small air force training school and a civil
Government flying service with such objects as forest patrol, survey and coastguard duties,
the work being carried out on repayment for Government departments, provincial governments
and private corporations. The former method, allowing of independent commercial expansion,
is better suited to British mentality and requirements, but its success will depend on a genuine
endeavour to make commercial aviation the real and vital basis of our air power. Experience
in commercial operation cannot be gained by the exploitation of air routes or the carriage
of mails or passengers under Service auspices. It is only by running transport services, as
far as possible under private management, that operational data can be obtained, economies
effected, and the design of strictly commercial machines improved.

To sum up. Military air supremacy can best be assured by the intensive development of industrial
air organization for commercial purposes. The conception of civil aviation as the mainstay
of air power as a whole is right. Service aviation is bound by technical and financial limits;
its scope confined to the requirements of war. Civil aviation, on the other hand, opens out
a prospect of productive expansion. The steady growth of the Continental services is already
beginning to demonstrate the importance of air transport.

FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC PROBLEMS.

The commercial exploitation of air transport is passing through a period of experiment, and
suffering in the general war reaction from the incapacity of the public to think of aviation
except as a fighting service. The machines hitherto used on the lines to and on the Continent
are principally converted war machines, and to transform military into commercial craft and
to use them as such is of small assistance to civil aviation, which requires reliable, economic
machines as one of the basic conditions of its financial success. The cost of running an air
transport service is considerable. Depreciation is one heavy item of expenditure. New machines
must be evolved suitable to the requirements of mail, passenger and freight transport, but,
in the present state of financial stringency, capital is not forthcoming for experiment unless
there is every promise of a safe return. Then there are the expenses involved in general ground
organization, maintenance, fuel, insurance, etc. The question is how can we carry on until
the really economic type of commercial machine is evolved. It will never be evolved unless
there is continuous flying and a continuous demand for new and improved machines for commercial
work. To meet this in France, the Government came forward with a liberal grant of subsidies
which have now been increased and placed on a more favourable basis, permitting of a very considerable
reduction in the fares for transport by air. The British Government has also granted a subsidy
for British firms operating on the cross-Channel routes, which it is hoped will place them
before long on a sound, self-supporting, commercial basis. Part of this subsidy is allocated
to assist transport companies in obtaining the latest type of commercial machines on a hire
purchase system. With a few services properly supported by the State we shall pull through
the experimental period of civil aviation.

The services to the Continent, although the distance is on the short side for the merits of
air transport to be properly demonstrated, effect a considerable saving in time, and it is
certain that the amount of mail, especially parcels, carried on these routes will continue
to increase and lead to the eventual adoption of normal rates for air postage. An extension
of the use of aircraft as the regular means of carrying mails will be of great assistance in
the development of air transport. Aircraft revolutionize the speed of intercommunication by
letter, and banks and financial houses will gradually realize that large savings can be made
by utilizing air mails for the transaction of business. A difficulty lies in the fact that
the area of the British Isles is not very favourable for an extensive air mail service, which
can only operate by day, since by the existing means of transport mails are carried during
the out-of-business hours and can generally reach their destination in a night, while the distances
to Paris and Brussels are too short to afford outstanding advantage.

Lastly, we require public support and a spirit of confidence in the air. This can only be secured
by increased reliability, reduction of charges and keeping the public informed of the progress
made. It is the nature of man to distrust new departures. He disliked the introduction of mechanical
devices into the Lancashire weaving mills. He scoffed at the steamship and railway. To-day
he is inclined to treat as premature the serious exploitation of the air. In spite of the great
decrease of accidents, in spite of the increased comfort of air travel, in spite of increased
regularity, the average person is slow to realize that the communication of the busy man of
the future will be by air. The majority of the business world is too conservative to make general
use of the opportunities offered by aircraft for the quick transmission of its correspondence,
while, though speed must be paid for, the high fares hitherto charged have deterred the general
public from substituting the aeroplane for the train or boat. The running costs represented
by these fares are being materially reduced as a more economic machine is evolved, and the
reduction of fares which helps to place competition with foreign subsidized services and with
the older forms of transport on more equal terms must for a time depend upon the assistance
of Government grants.

WEATHER CONDITIONS AND NIGHT FLYING.

The safety of the machine and the reliability of an air service largely depend on accurate
weather forecasts. In order to co-ordinate the meteorological work of the country as a whole,
and for the special assistance of aviation, the Meteorological Services of Great Britain have
been amalgamated under the Department of Civil Aviation, and, working in close co-operation
with the Communications Branch of the Department, have made improvements in the rapid collection
and distribution of meteorological information for all purposes. In addition to the forecasts
issued four times daily, collective reports are issued hourly by wireless from the London terminal
aerodrome at Croydon and copies are distributed to transport companies and others concerned.

A feature of meteorology which is often overlooked is its economic value. By making use of
a knowledge of the wind at different heights, aircraft can complete journeys more quickly than
would otherwise be possible, and thereby save their own fuel and their passengers' time. This
will be specially useful in the tropics where the regularity of the surface winds has its counterpart
in the upper air, but even in Europe time-tables can be drawn up with due attention to the
favourable and unfavourable effect of prevailing winds. The planning of airship routes in particular,
must be considered in close connection with this aspect of weather conditions.

To-day, however, the aeroplane may be considered as an "all-weather" craft, save for mist and
fog--the enemies of all transport and particularly to that of the air--to which unfortunately
England is particularly liable during the winter. Experiments have been carried out on the
dispersal of fog, the illumination of aerodromes by fog-piercing lights, and instruments to
record the exact position of the aeroplane and its height above the ground, but success has
not yet been achieved.

Similar to the problems of flying and landing in mist and fog is that of night flying. Until
night flying is practicable, only half the value of the aeroplane's speed is obtainable, since
other transport services run continuously day and night. Further, as machines become rapidly
obsolete owing to technical progress, it is essential that they should be in use for the greatest
number of hours during their life. Much has been done in the lighting and marking of aerodromes
and in the equipment of aeroplanes with wireless telephone and direction-finding apparatus.

It may here be mentioned that there are two methods of obtaining the position of aircraft by
means of wireless telegraphy, known as direction-finding and position-finding. Direction-finding
is effected by means of two coils set at right angles in the aircraft, by means of which the
bearing of a transmitting ground station with reference to the aircraft's compass can be taken.
When two or more bearings on different ground stations, whose position is known, have been
obtained, a "cut" or "fix" of the aircraft is obtained. The position-finding system consists
of two or more ground stations fitted with apparatus capable of taking bearings with respect
to true north and connected by direct telephone line. The aircraft calls up by wireless one
of these stations, requests her position and then makes a series of signals for about half
a minute. The stations take the aircraft's bearings, plot its position, and transmit the information
to the aircraft. Wireless direction and position-finding, as well as wireless telephony, have
on several occasions proved their value to navigation, but in spite of instances of successful
night flying, developments have not been such as to render night services practicable.

Marine experience has been a valuable guide, but aerial illumination has entailed many new
problems of its own--the distribution of light through very wide angles, the installation of
light and powerful lamps in aircraft, the elimination of shadows and the prevention of dazzle,
the provision of apparatus to indicate the strength and direction of the wind, and the like.

Very shortly the first organized and equipped night-flying route will be available; that between
London and Lympne on the Continental air highway. The Boulogne-Paris section will probably
be ready a little later. There will be four lighthouses on the English section, of which two
will be automatic, requiring no attention for twelve months at a time. These, and many other,
facilities will much assist the progressive establishment of services during the hours of darkness,
and will provide valuable data for the establishment of other night-flying routes. There is
no real difficulty given a reasonably clear atmosphere.

ORGANIZATION.

I have mentioned the broad lines on which the organization of the air services was built up
before and during the war. We have seen that the initial foundations and framework remained
and bore the great systematic structural development which was gradually required. In August,
1914, there were some 240 officers, 1800 men and 200 machines; in November, 1918, 30,000 officers,
170,000 men, and 22,000 machines, all of them better and of a higher performance than those
of 1914. Our casualties during the war were about 18,000; air formations had been active in
some fifteen theatres of operations; 8,000 enemy machines and 300 observation balloons had
been destroyed; some three-quarters of a million photographs taken over hostile country, and
12,000,000 rounds had been fired from the air at ground targets. At Home two organizations
had expanded independently from the same seed until, impeding one another's growth, their trunks
had joined and a single and improved tree was the result.

