Here we also find drills, awls, and perforators, slick stones and dressers, pipes of various
forms and finish, discoidal stones and net sinkers, butterflys tones and other supposed ceremonial
objects, masks or face figures and bird-shaped stones, gorgets, totems, pendants, trinkets,
etc. Nor does the resemblance stop with types, but it is carried down to specific forms and
finish, leaving absolutely no possible line of demarkation between these and the similar articles
attributed to the mound-builders. So persistently true is this that had we stone articles alone
to judge by, it is probable we should be forced to the conclusion, as held by some writers,
that the former inhabitants of that portion of the United States east of the Rocky Mountains
pertained to one nation, unless possibly the prevalence of certain types in particular sections
should afford some data for tribal districting.

This strong similarity of the stone articles of the Atlantic coast to those of the mound area
was noticed as early as 1820 by Caleb Atwater, who, knowing that the former were Indian manufactures,
attributed the latter also to the same people although he held that the mounds were the work
of the ancestors of the civilized nations of Mexico and Central America.

Mound and Indian Pottery.--The pottery of the mound-builders has often been referred to as
proof of a higher culture status, and of an advance in art beyond that reached by the Indians.
The vase with a bird figure found by Squier and Davis in an Ohio mound is presented in most
works on American archaeology as an evidence of the advanced stage of the ceramic art among
the mound-builders; but Dr. Rau, who examined the collection of these authors, says:

Having seen the best specimens of "mound" pottery obtained during the survey of Messrs. Squier
and Davis, I do not hesitate to assert that the clay vessels fabricated at the Cahokia Creek
were in every respect equal to those exhumed from the mounds of the Mississippi Valley, and
Dr. Davis himself, who examined my specimens from the first-named locality, expressed the same
opinion. [Footnote: Smithsonian Rept., 1866, p. 349.]

The Cahokia pottery which he found along the creek of that name (Madison County, Ill.) he ascribes
to Indians, and believes it to be of comparatively recent origin.

Most of the mound pottery is mixed with pulverized shells, which is also true of most Indian
pottery. [Footnote: Dumont, Mem. Hist. La., vol. 2, 1753, p. 271; Adair, Hist. Am. Indians,
p. 424; Loskiel, Gesell. der Miss., p. 70, etc.] Du Pratz says that "the Natchez Indians make
pots of an extraordinary size, cruses with a medium-sized opening, jars, bottles with long
necks holding two pints, and pots or cruses for holding bear's oil;" [Footnote: Hist. La.,
p. 79.] also that they colored them a beautiful red by using ocher, which becomes red after
burning.

As is well known, the bottle-shaped vase with a long neck is the typical form of clay vessels
found in the mounds of Arkansas and southeastern Missouri, and is also common in the mounds
and stone graves of middle Tennessee. They were cleverly "built," of a light-grey mixture, a
broad stripe of the most vivid scarlet traversing each seam in a perpendicular direction from
hip to ankle--in short, the regimental costume of the Royal Bombay Fencibles.
 As will hereafter be shown, there are reasons for believing this
pottery was made by the Shawnees.

The statement so often made that the mound pottery, especially that of Ohio, far excels that
of the Indians is not justified by the facts.

Much more evidence of like tenor might be presented here, as, for example, the numerous instances
in which articles of European manufacture have been found in mounds where their presence could
not be attributed to intrusive burials, but the limits of the paper will not admit of this.
I turn, therefore, to the problem before us, viz, "Who were the authors of the typical works
of Ohio?"

As before stated, the answer is, "These works are attributable in part at least to the ancestors
of the modern Cherokees."

As a connecting link between what has been given and the direct evidence that the Cherokees
were mound-builders, and as having an important bearing upon both questions, the evidence derived
from the box-shaped stone graves is introduced at this point.

CHAPTER III.

STONE GRAVES AND WHAT THEY TEACH.

In order to state clearly the argument based upon these works it is necessary to present a
brief explanation.

There are several forms and varieties of stone graves or cists found in the mound area, some
being of cobble stones, others of slabs; some round, others polygonal; some dome-shaped, others
square, and others box shaped, or parallelograms. Reference is made at present only to the
last mentioned--the box shaped type, made of stone slabs. If the evidence shows that this variety
is found only in certain districts, pertains to a certain class of works, and is usually accompanied
by certain types of art, we are warranted in using it as an ethnic characteristic, or as indicating
the presence of particular tribes. If it can be shown that graves of this form are found in
mounds attributed to the so- called mound-builders, and that certain tribes of Indians of historic
times were also accustomed to bury in them, we are warranted in assuming that there was a continuity
of custom from the mound-building age to historic times, or that graves found in the mounds
are probably attributable to the same people (or allied tribes) found using them at a later
date. This conclusion will be strengthened by finding that certain peculiar types of art are
limited to the regions where these graves exist, and are found almost exclusively in connection
with them.

These graves, as is well known, are formed of rough and unhewn slabs or flat pieces of stone,
thus: First, in a pit some 2 or 3 feet deep and of the desired dimensions, dug for the purpose,
a layer of stone is placed to form the floor; next, similar pieces are set on edge to form
the sides and ends, over which other slabs are laid flat, forming the covering, the whole when
finished making a rude, box-shaped coffin or sepulcher. Sometimes one or more of the six faces
are wanting; occasionally the bottom consists of a layer of water-worn bowlders; sometimes
the top is not a single layer of slabs, but other pieces are laid over the joints, and sometimes
they are placed shingle-fashion. These graves vary in length from 14 inches to 8 feet, and
in width from 9 inches to 3 feet.

It is not an unusual thing to find a mound containing a number of those cists arranged in two,
three, or more tiers. As a general rule, those not in mounds are near the surface of the ground,
and in some instances even projecting above it. It is probable that no one who has examined
them has failed to note their strong resemblance to the European mode of burial. Even Dr. Joseph
Jones, who attributes them to some "ancient race," was forcibly reminded of this resemblance,
as he remarks:

In looking at the rude stone coffins of Tennessee, I have again and again been impressed with
the idea that in some former age this ancient race must have come in contact with Europeans
and derived this mode of burial from them. [Footnote: Aboriginal Remains of Tennessee, pp. 34,35]

