There is here a quality in the narration more intimate and particular than is general with
Hugo; but it must be owned, on the other hand, that the book is wordy, and even, now and then,
a little wearisome.  Ursus and his wolf are pleasant enough companions; but the former is nearly
as much an abstract type as the latter.  There is a beginning, also, of an abuse of conventional
conversation, such as may be quite pardonable in the drama where needs must, but is without
excuse in the romance.  Lastly, I suppose one must say a word or two about the weak points
of this not immaculate novel; and if so, it will be best to distinguish at once.  The large
family of English blunders, to which we have alluded already in speaking of LES TRAVAILLEURS,
are of a sort that is really indifferent in art.  If Shakespeare makes his ships cast anchor
by some seaport of Bohemia, if Hugo imagines Tom-Tim- Jack to be a likely nickname for an English
sailor, or if either Shakespeare, or Hugo, or Scott, for that matter, be guilty of "figments
enough to confuse the march of a whole history - anachronisms enough to overset all, chronology,"
(1) the life of their creations, the artistic truth and accuracy of their work, is not so much
as compromised.  But when we come upon a passage like the sinking of the "Ourque" in this romance,
we can do nothing but cover our face with our hands: the conscientious reader feels a sort
of disgrace in the very reading.  For such artistic falsehoods, springing from what I have
called already an unprincipled avidity after effect, no amount of blame can be exaggerated;
and above all, when the criminal is such a man as Victor Hugo.  We cannot forgive in him what
we might have passed over in a third-rate sensation novelist.  Little as he seems to know of
the sea and nautical affairs, he must have known very well that vessels do not go down as he
makes the "Ourque" go down; he must have known that such a liberty with fact was against the
laws of the game, and incompatible with all appearance of sincerity in conception or workmanship.

(1) Prefatory letter to PEVERIL OF THE PEAK.

In each of these books, one after another, there has been some departure from the traditional
canons of romance; but taking each separately, one would have feared to make too much of these
departures, or to found any theory upon what was perhaps purely accidental.  The appearance
of QUATRE VINGT TREIZE has put us out of the region of such doubt. Like a doctor who has long
been hesitating how to classify an epidemic malady, we have come at last upon a case so well
marked that our uncertainty is at an end.  It is a novel built upon "a sort of enigma," which
was at that date laid before revolutionary France, and which is presented by Hugo to Tellmarch,
to Lantenac, to Gauvain, and very terribly to Cimourdain, each of whom gives his own solution
of the question, clement or stern, according to the temper of his spirit.  That enigma was
this: "Can a good action be a bad action?  Does not he who spares the wolf kill the sheep?"
This question, as I say, meets with one answer after another during the course of the book,
and yet seems to remain undecided to the end.  And something in the same way, although one
character, or one set of characters, after another comes to the front and occupies our attention
for the moment, we never identify our interest with any of these temporary heroes nor regret
them after they are withdrawn. We soon come to regard them somewhat as special cases of a general
law; what we really care for is something that they only imply and body forth to us.