UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS

MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

Volume 12, No. 15, pp. 657-680, 11 figs. Published May 18, 1964

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS Lawrence, Kansas

PRINTED BY HARRY (BUD) TIMBERLAKE, STATE PRINTER TOPEKA, KANSAS 1964

30-1522

The Adductor Muscles of the Jaw In Some Primitive Reptiles

BY

RICHARD C. FOX

Information about osteological changes in the groups of reptiles that gave rise to mammals
is preserved in the fossil record, but the musculature of these reptiles has been lost forever.
Nevertheless, a reasonably accurate picture of the morphology and the spatial relationships
of the muscles of many of these extinct vertebrates can be inferred by studying the scars or
other marks delimiting the origins and insertions of muscles on the skeletons of the fossils
and by studying the anatomy of Recent genera. A reconstruction built by these methods is largely
speculative, especially when the fossil groups are far removed in time, kinship and morphology
from Recent kinds, and when distortion, crushing, fragmentation and overzealous preparation
have damaged the surfaces associated with the attachment of muscles. The frequent inadequacy
of such direct evidence can be partially offset by considering the mechanical demands that
groups of muscles must meet to perform a particular movement of a skeletal member.

Both direct anatomical evidence and inferred functional relations were used to satisfy the
purposes of the study here reported on. The following account reports the results of my efforts
to: 1, reconstruct the adductor muscles of the mandible in Captorhinus and Dimetrodon; 2, reconstruct
the external adductors of the mandible in the cynodont Thrinaxodon; and 3, learn the causes
of the appearance and continued expansion of the temporal fenestrae among the reptilian ancestors
of mammals.

The osteology of these three genera is comparatively well-known. Although each of the genera
is somewhat specialized, none seems to have departed radically from its relatives that comprised
the line leading to mammals.

I thank Prof. Theodore H. Eaton, Jr., for suggesting the study here reported on, for his perceptive
criticisms regarding it, and for his continued patience throughout my investigation. Financial
assistance was furnished by his National Science Foundation Grant (NSF-G8624) for which I am
also appreciative. I thank Dr. Rainer Zangerl, Chief Curator of Geology, Chicago Museum of
Natural History, for permission to examine the specimens of Captorhinus and Dimetrodon in that
institution. I am grateful to Mr. Robert F. Clarke, Assistant Professor of Biology, The Kansas
State Teachers College, Emporia, Kansas, for the opportunity to study his specimens of Captorhinus
from Richard's Spur, Oklahoma. Special acknowledgment is due Mr. Merton C. Bowman for his able
preparation of the illustrations.

Captorhinus

The outlines of the skulls of Captorhinus differ considerably from those of the skulls of the
primitive captorhinomorph Protorothyris. Watson (1954:335, Fig. 9) has shown that in the morphological
sequence, Protorothyris--Romeria--Captorhinus, there has been flattening and rounding of the
skull-roof and loss of the primitive "square-cut" appearance in transverse section. The quadrates
in Captorhinus are farther from the midline than in Protorothyris, and the adductor chambers
in Captorhinus are considerably wider than they were primitively. Additionally, the postorbital
region of Captorhinus is relatively longer than that of Protorothyris, a specialization that
has increased the length of the chambers within.

In contrast with these dimensional changes there has been little shift in the pattern of the
dermal bones that roof the adductor chambers. The most conspicuous modification in Captorhinus
is the absence of the tabular. This element in Protorothyris was limited to the occiput and
rested without sutural attachment upon the squamosal (Watson, 1954:338); later loss of the
tabular could have had no effect upon the origins of muscles from inside the skull roof. Changes
in pattern that may have modified the origin of the adductors in Captorhinus were correlated
with the increase in length of the parietals and the reduction of the supratemporals. Other
changes that were related to the departure from the primitive romeriid condition of the adductors
included the development of a coronoid process, the flattening of the quadrate-articular joint,
and the development of the peculiar dentition of Captorhinus.

The adductor chambers of Captorhinus are large. They are covered dorsally and laterally by
the parietal, squamosal, postfrontal, postorbital, quadratojugal and jugal bones. The chamber
extends medially to the braincase, but is not limited anteriorly by a bony wall. The occiput
provides the posterior limit. The greater part of the adductor chambers lies mediad of the
mandibles and thus of the Meckelian fossae; consequently the muscles that arise from the dermal
roof pass downward and outward to their insertion on the mandibular rami.

Mandible

The mandibular rami of Captorhinus are strongly constructed. Each ramus is slightly convex
in lateral outline. Approximately the anterior half of each ramus lies beneath the tooth-row.
This half is roughly wedge-shaped in its lateral aspect, reaching its greatest height beneath
the short posterior teeth.

The posterior half of each ramus is not directly involved in supporting the teeth, but is associated
with the adductor musculature and the articulation of the ramus with the quadrate. The ventral
margin of this part of the ramus curves dorsally in a gentle arc that terminates posteriorly
at the base of the retroarticular process. The dorsal margin in contrast sweeps sharply upward
behind the teeth and continues posteriorly in a long, low, truncated coronoid process.

A prominent coronoid process is not found among the more primitive members of the suborder,
such as Limnoscelis, although the mandible commonly curves upward behind the tooth-row in that
genus. This area in Limnoscelis is overlapped by the cheek when the jaw is fully adducted (Romer,
1956:494, Fig. 213), thereby foreshadowing the more extreme condition in Captorhinus.

The coronoid process in Captorhinus is not oriented vertically, but slopes inward toward the
midline at approximately 45 degrees, effectively roofing the Meckelian fossa and limiting its
opening to the median surface of each ramus. When the jaw was adducted, the coronoid process
moved upward and inside the cheek. A space persisted between the process and the cheek because
the process sloped obliquely away from the cheek and toward the midline of the skull. The external
surface of the process presented an area of attachment for muscles arising from the apposing
internal surface of the cheek.

Palate

The palate of Captorhinus is of the generalized rhynchocephalian type (Romer, 1956:71). In
Captorhinus the pterygoids and palatines are markedly arched and the relatively large pterygoid
flange lies almost entirely below the lower border of the cheek. The lateral edge of the flange
passes obliquely across the anterior lip of the Meckelian fossa and abuts against the bottom
lip of the fossa when the jaw is closed.

The palatines articulate laterally with the maxillary bones by means of a groove that fits
over a maxillary ridge. This presumably allowed the halves of the palate to move up and down
rather freely. The greatest amplitude of movement was at the midline. Anteroposterior sliding
of the palate seems impossible in view of the firm palatoquadrate and quadrate-quadratojugal
articulations.

The subtemporal fossa is essentially triangular, and its broad end is bounded anteriorly by
the pterygoid flange. The fossa is lateral to much of the adductor chamber; consequently muscles
arising from the parietals passed ventrolaterally, parallel to the oblique quadrate ramus of
the pterygoid, to their attachment on the mandible.

Musculature

These osteological features indicate that the adductor muscles of the jaw in Captorhinus consisted
of two primary masses (Figs. 1, 2, 3). The first of these, the capitimandibularis, arose from
the internal surface of the cheek and roof of the skull and inserted on the bones of the lower
jaw that form the Meckelian canal and the coronoid process.

The muscle was probably divided into a major medial mass, the temporal, and a lesser, sheetlike
lateral mass, the masseter. The temporal was the largest of the adductors and arose from the
lateral parts of the parietal, the dorsal parts of the postorbital, the most posterior extent
of the postfrontal, and the upper parts of the squamosal. The muscle may have been further
subdivided, but evidence for subordinate slips is lacking. The fibers of this mass were nearly
vertically oriented in lateral aspect since the parts of the ramus that are available for their
insertion lie within the anteroposterior extent of the adductor chamber. In anterior aspect
the fibers were obliquely oriented, since the jaw and subtemporal fossa are lateral to much
of the skull-roof from which the fibers arose.

The masseter probably arose from the quadratojugal, the jugal, and ventral parts of the squamosal,
although scars on the quadratojugal and jugal are lacking. The squamosal bears an indistinct,
gently curved ridge, passing upward and forward from the posteroventral corner of the bone
and paralleling the articulation of the squamosal with the parietal. This ridge presumably
marks the upper limits of the origin of the masseter from the squamosal.

The masseter inserted on the external surface of the coronoid process, within two shallow concavities
separated by an oblique ridge. The concavities and ridge may indicate that the muscle was divided
into two sheets. If so, the anterior component was wedge-shaped in cross-section, and its thin
posterior edge overlapped the larger mass that inserted on the posterior half of the coronoid
process.

From a functional standpoint it is doubtful that a major component of the adductors arose from
the quadrate wing of the pterygoid, for when the jaw is closed the Meckelian fossa is directly
lateral to that bone. If the jaw were at almost any angle but maximum depression, the greatest
component of force would be mediad, pulling the rami together and not upward. The mediad component
would increase as the jaw approached full adduction. Neither is there anatomical evidence for
an adductor arising from the quadrate wing of the pterygoid. The bone is smooth, hard, and
without any marks that might be interpreted as muscle scars.

The internal adductor or pterygoid musculature in Captorhinus consisted of anterior and posterior
components. The anterior pterygoid arose from the lateral edge and the dorsal surface of the
pterygoid flange. The burred dorsal recurvature of the edge resembles that of the flange of
crocodiles, which serves as part of the origin of the anterior pterygoid in those animals.
In Captorhinus the attachment of the anterior pterygoid to the edge of the flange was probably
tendinous, judging from the extent of the development of the edge of the flange. From the edge
the origin extended medially across the dorsal surface of the flange; the ridging of this surface
is indistinct, leading to the supposition that here the origin was more likely to have been
fleshy than tendinous.

The anterior pterygoid extended obliquely backward and downward from its origin, passed medial
to the temporal muscle and inserted on the ventral and medial surfaces of the splenial and
angular bones beneath the Meckelian fossa. The spatial relationship between the palate and
quadrate-articular joint indicate that the muscle was probably a minor adductor in Captorhinus.

When the jaw was adducted, the insertion of the anterior pterygoid was in a plane nearly level
with the origin. Contraction of the anterior pterygoid when the jaw was in this position pulled
the mandible forward and did not adduct it. Maximum depression of the mandible produced maximum
disparity vertically between the levels of the origin and insertion. The force exerted by the
anterior pterygoid upon the mandible when fully lowered most nearly approached the perpendicular
to the long axes of the mandibular rami, and the resultant force acting on the mandible was
adductive.

The adductive component of force therefore decreased as the jaw swung upward, with the result
that the anterior pterygoid could only have been active in initiating adduction and not in
sustaining it.

The evidence regarding the position and extent of the posterior pterygoid is more veiled. On
the medial surface of the mandible, the prearticular and articular bones meet in a ridge that
ventrally rims the glenoid cavity (Fig. 4). The ridge extends anteriorly and curves slightly
in a dorsal direction and meets the Meckelian fossa. The curved part of the ridge is made of
the prearticular bone alone. A small hollow above the ridge, anterior to the glenoid cavity,
faces the medial plane of the skull and is bordered by the articular bone behind and above,
and by the Meckelian fossa in front.

The surfaces of the hollow and the prearticular-articular ridge bear tiny grooves and ridges
that seem to be muscle scars. The entire area of the hollow and its bordering features was
probably the area of insertion of the posterior pterygoid.

However, the area of insertion lies mostly ventral to the articulating surface of the articular
bone and extends but slightly in front of it. Seemingly little lever effect could be exercised
by an adductor attaching in this position, namely, at the level of the fulcrum of the mandibular
ramus.

The posterior pterygoid muscle probably arose from the anterior portion of the pterygoid wing
of the quadrate, from a ridge on the ventromedial surface. From the relationship of the muscle
to the articulation of the jaw with the skull, it may be deduced that the muscle was limited
in function to the stabilization of the quadrate-articular joint by keeping the articular surfaces
in close contact with each other and by preventing lateral slipping.

Finally there is evidence for an adductor between the temporal and masseter masses. The anterior
dorsal lip of the Meckelian fossa supports a small knob to which this muscle attached, much
as in Sphenodon (Romer, 1956:18, Fig. 12). Presumably the muscle was sheetlike and attached
to the skull roof, medial to the attachment of the masseter.

A pseudotemporal may have been present, but evidence to indicate its extent and position is
lacking. The muscle usually arises from the epipterygoid and nearby areas of the braincase
and skull roof and inserts in the anterior parts of the fossa of the jaw. In Captorhinus the
lateral wing of the pterygoid cuts across the fossa, effectively blocking it from the upper
and medial parts of the skull, the areas of origin for the pseudotemporal.

Dimetrodon

The morphology of the skull of Dimetrodon closely resembles that of the primitive Haptodus
(Haptodontinae, Sphenacodontidae), and "hence may be rather confidently described as that of
the family as a whole" (Romer and Price, 1940:285). The major differences between the two genera
are in the increased specialization of the dentition, the shortening of the lacrimal, and the
development of long vertebral spines in Dimetrodon. The absence of gross differences in the
areas of the skull associated with the groups of muscles with which this study is concerned,
implies a similarity in the patterns of musculature between the two groups. Romer and Price
suggest that Haptodus, although too late in time to be an actual ancestor, shows "all the common
features of the Dimetrodon group on the one hand and the therapsids on the other." The adductors
of the jaw of Dimetrodon were probably little changed from those of the Haptodontinae and represent
a primitive condition within the suborder.

Dimetrodon and Captorhinus differ in the bones associated with the adductor mechanism; the
area behind the orbit in Dimetrodon is relatively shorter, reducing the comparative longitudinal
extent of the adductor chamber. Furthermore, the dermal roof above the adductor chamber slopes
gently downward from behind the orbit to its contact with the occipital plate in Dimetrodon.
Temporal fenestrae are, of course, present in Dimetrodon.

Musculature

The adductor musculature of the lower jaw in Dimetrodon was divided into lateral and medial
groups (Figs. 5, 6). The lateral division consisted of temporal and masseter masses. The temporal
arose from the upper rim of the temporal opening, from the lateral wall of the skull behind
the postorbital strut, and from the dorsal roof of the skull. The bones of origin included
jugal, postorbital, postfrontal, parietal and squamosal. This division may also have arisen
from the fascia covering the temporal opening (Romer and Price, 1940:53). The muscle passed
into the Meckelian fossa of the mandible and inserted on the angular, surangular, prearticular,
coronoid and dentary bones. Insertion on the lips of the fossa also probably occurred.

The lateral division arose from the lower rim of the temporal opening and from the bones beneath.
Insertion was in the Meckelian fossa and on the dorsal surface of the adjoining coronoid process.

The reconstruction of the progressively widening masseter as it traveled to the mandible follows
from the progressively widening depression on the internal wall of the cheek against which
the muscle must have been appressed. The depressed surface included the posterior wing of the
jugal, the whole of the squamosal, and probably the anteriormost parts of the quadratojugal.
Expansion of the muscle rostrally was prevented by the postorbital strut that protected the
orbit (Romer and Price, 1940:53).

The sphenacodonts possess the primitive rhynchocephalian kind of palate. In Sphenodon the anterior
pterygoid muscle arises from the dorsal surface of the pterygoid bone and from the adjacent
bones. A similar origin suggests itself for the corresponding muscle, the second major adductor
mass, in Dimetrodon.

From the origin the muscle passed posterodorsad and laterad of the pterygoid flange. Insertion
was in the notch formed by the reflected lamina of the angular, as suggested by Watson (1948).

In Dimetrodon the relationship of the dorsal surface of the palate and the ventromedial surface
of the mandible in front of the articulation with the quadrate is unlike that in Captorhinus.
When the mandible of Dimetrodon is at rest (adducted), a line drawn between these two areas
is oblique, between 30 and 40 degrees from the horizontal. Depression of the mandible increases
this angle. The insertion of the anterior pterygoid is thus always considerably below the origin,
permitting the muscle to be active throughout the movement of the mandible, from maximum depression
to complete adduction. This was a major factor in adding substantially to the speed and power
of the bite.

The presence and extent of a posterior pterygoid is more difficult to assess, because of the
closeness of the glenoid cavity and the raised ridge of the prearticular, and the occupancy
of at least part of this region by the anterior pterygoid. In some specimens of Dimetrodon
the internal process of the articular is double (see Romer and Price, 1940:87, Fig. 16) indicating
that there was a double insertion here. Whether the double insertion implies the insertion
of two separate muscles is, of course, the problem. Division of the pterygoid into anterior
and posterior portions is the reptilian pattern (Adams, 1919), and such is adhered to here,
with the posterior pterygoid arising as a thin sheet from the quadrate wing of the pterygoid
and the quadrate, and inserting by means of a tendon on the internal process of the articular,
next to the insertion of the anterior pterygoid.

Watson (1948) has reconstructed the musculature of the jaw in Dimetrodon with results that
are at variance with those of the present study. Watson recognized two divisions, an inner
temporal and an outer masseteric, of the capitimandibularis, but has pictured them (830: Fig.
4; 831: Fig. 5C) as both arising from the inner surface of the skull roof above the temporal
opening. But in Captorhinus the masseter arose from the lower part of the cheek close to the
outer surface of the coronoid process. Watson has shown (1948:860, Fig. 17B) the same relationship
of muscle to zygoma in Kannemeyeria sp. It is this arrangement that is also characteristic
of mammals and presumably of Thrinaxodon. In view of the consistency of this pattern, I have
reconstructed the masseter as arising from the lower wall of the cheek beneath the temporal
opening.

Watson's reconstruction shows both the temporal and masseter muscles as being limited anteroposteriorly
to an extent only slightly greater than the anteroposterior diameter of the temporal opening.
The whole of the posterior half of the adductor chamber is unoccupied. More probably this area
was filled by muscles. The impress on the inner surface of the cheek is evident, and the extent
of both the coronoid process and Meckelian opening beneath the rear part of the chamber indicate
that muscles passed through this area.

Watson remarked (1948:829-830) that the Meckelian opening in Dimetrodon "is very narrow and
the jaw cavity is very small. None the less, it may have been occupied by the muscle or a ligament
connected to it. Such an insertion leaves unexplained the great dorsal production of the dentary,
surangular and coronoid. This may merely be a device to provide great dorsal-ventral stiffness
to the long jaw, but it is possible and probable that some part of the temporal muscle was
inserted on the inner surface of the coronoid. Indeed a very well-preserved jaw of D. limbatus?
(R. 105: Pl. I, Fig. 2) bears a special depressed area on the outer surface of the extreme
hinder end of the dentary which differs in surface modelling from the rest of the surface of
the jaw, has a definite limit anteriorly, and may represent a muscle insertion. The nature
of these insertions suggests that the muscle was already divided into two parts, an outer masseter
and an inner temporalis." But, unaccountably, Watson's illustration (1948:830, Fig. 4) of his
reconstruction limits the insertion of the temporal to the anterior limit of the Meckelian
opening and a part of the coronoid process above it. No muscle is shown entering the Meckelian
canal. It seems more likely that the temporal entered and inserted in the canal and on its
dorsal lips. The masseter inserted lateral to it, over the peak of the coronoid process, and
overlapping onto the dorsalmost portions of its external face, as Watson has illustrated (Plate
I, middle fig.).

I am in agreement with Watson's reconstruction of the origins for both the anterior and posterior
pterygoid muscles. On a functional basis, however, I would modify slightly Watson's placement
of the insertions of these muscles. Watson believed that the jaw of Dimetrodon was capable
of anteroposterior sliding. The articular surfaces of the jaws of Dimetrodon that I have examined
indicate that this capability, if present at all, was surely of a very limited degree, and
in no way comparable to that of Captorhinus. The dentition of Dimetrodon further substantiates
the movement of the jaw in a simple up and down direction. The teeth of Dimetrodon are clearly
stabbing devices; they are not modified at all for grinding and the correlative freedom of
movement of the jaw that that function requires in an animal such as Edaphosaurus. Nor are
they modified to parallel the teeth of Captorhinus. The latter's diet is less certain, but
presumably it was insectivorous (Romer, 1928). With the requisite difference in levels of origin
and insertion of the anterior pterygoid in Dimetrodon insuring the application of force throughout
the adduction of the jaws, it would seem that the whole of the insertion should be shifted
downward and outward in the notch. If this change were made in the reconstruction, the anterior
pterygoid would have to be thought of as having arisen by a tendon from the ridge that Watson
has pictured (1948:828, Fig. 3) as separating his origins for anterior and posterior pterygoids.
The posterior pterygoid, in turn, arose by tendons from the adjoining lateral ridge and from
the pterygoid process of Romer and Price. Tendinous origins are indicated by the limitations
of space in this area, by the strength of the ridges pictured and reported by Watson, and by
the massiveness of the pterygoid process of Romer and Price.

Discussion

A comparison of the general pattern of the adductor musculature of Captorhinus and Dimetrodon
reveals an expected similarity. The evidence indicates that the lateral and medial temporal
masses were present in both genera. The anterior pterygoid aided in initiating adduction in
Captorhinus, whereas in Dimetrodon this muscle was adductive throughout the swing of the jaw.
Evidence for the presence and extent of a pseudotemporal muscle in both Captorhinus and Dimetrodon
is lacking. The posterior division of the pterygoid is small in Captorhinus. In Dimetrodon
this muscle has been reconstructed by Watson as a major adductor, an arrangement that is adhered
to here with but slight modification.

The dentition of Captorhinus suggests that the jaw movement in feeding was more complex than
the simple depression and adduction that was probably characteristic of Dimetrodon and supports
the osteological evidence for a relatively complex adductor mechanism.

In Captorhinus the presence of an overlapping premaxillary beak bearing teeth that are slanted
posteriorly requires that the mandible be drawn back in order to be depressed. Conversely,
during closure, the jaw must be pulled forward to complete full adduction. The quadrate-articular
joint is flat enough to permit such anteroposterior sliding movements. The relationship of
the origin and insertion of the anterior pterygoid indicates that this muscle, ineffective
in maintaining adduction, may well have acted to pull the mandible forward, in back of the
premaxillary beak, in the last stages of adduction. Abrasion of the sides of the inner maxillary
and outer dentary teeth indicates that tooth-to-tooth contact did occur. Whether such abrasion
was due to contact in simple vertical adduction or in anteroposterior sliding is impossible
to determine, but the evidence considered above indicates the latter probability.

Similarities of Protorothyris to sphenacodont pelycosaurs in the shape of the skull and palate
already commented upon by Watson (1954) and Hotton (1961) suggest that the condition of the
adductors in Dimetrodon is a retention of the primitive reptilian pattern, with modifications
mainly limited to an increase in size of the temporalis. Captorhinus, however, seems to have
departed rather radically from the primitive pattern, developing specializations of the adductors
that are correlated with the flattening of the skull, the peculiar marginal and anterior dentition,
the modifications of the quadrate-articular joint, and the development of the coronoid process.

Thrinaxodon

The evidence for the position and extent of the external adductors of the lower jaw in Thrinaxodon
was secured in part from dissections of Didelphis marsupialis, the Virginia opossum. Moreover,
comparison of the two genera reveals striking similarities in the shape and spatial relationships
of the external adductors. These are compared below in some detail.

The sagittal crest in Thrinaxodon is present but low. It arises immediately in front of the
pineal foramen from the confluence of bilateral ridges that extend posteriorly and medially
from the base of the postorbital bars. The crest diverges around the foramen, reunites immediately
behind it, and continues posteriorly to its junction with the supraoccipital crest (Estes, 1961).

In Didelphis the sagittal crest is high and dorsally convex in lateral aspect, arising posterior
to and medial to the orbits, reaching its greatest height near the midpoint, and sloping down
to its termination at the supraoccipital crest. Two low ridges extend posteriorly from the
postorbital process to the anterior end of the sagittal crest and correspond to ridges in similar
position in Thrinaxodon.

The supraoccipital crest flares upward to a considerable extent in Thrinaxodon and slopes posteriorly
from the skull-roof proper. The crest extends on either side downward to its confluence with
the zygomatic bar. The area of the crest that is associated with the temporal musculature is
similarly shaped in Didelphis.

The zygomatic bar in each genus is stout, laterally compressed, and dorsally convex on both
upper and lower margins. At the back of the orbit of Thrinaxodon, the postorbital process of
the jugal extends posterodorsally. At this position in Didelphis, there is but a minor upward
curvature of the margin of the bar.

In Thrinaxodon the dorsal and ventral postorbital processes, arising from the postorbital and
jugal bones respectively, nearly meet but remain separate. The orbit is not completely walled
off from the adductor chamber. The corresponding processes in Didelphis are rudimentary so
that the confluence of the orbit and the adductor chamber is complete.

The adductor chamber dorsally occupies slightly less than half of the total length of the skull
of Thrinaxodon; in Didelphis the dorsal length of the chamber is approximately half of the
total length of the skull.

The coronoid process in Thrinaxodon sweeps upward posterodorsally at an angle oblique to the
long axis of the ramus. Angular, surangular and articular bones extend backward beneath and
medial to the process. The process extends above the most dorsal point of the zygomatic bar,
as in Didelphis. The mandibular ramus is ventrally convex in both genera.

The relationships described above suggest that Thrinaxodon and the therapsids having similar
morphology in the posterior region of the skull possessed a temporal adductor mass that was
split into major medial and lateral components (Fig. 7). The more lateral of these, the masseter,
arose from the inner surface and lower margin of the zygomatic bar and inserted on the lateral
surface of the coronoid process.

The medial division or temporal arose from the sagittal crest and supraoccipital crest and
the intervening dermal roof. The muscle inserted on the inner and outer surfaces of the coronoid
process and possibly on the bones beneath.

Thrinaxodon represents an advance beyond Dimetrodon in several respects. The zygomatic bar
in Thrinaxodon extends relatively far forward, is bowed outward and dorsally arched. Consequently,
the masseter was able to extend from an anterodorsal origin to a posterior and ventral insertion.
The curvature of the jaw transforms the anterodorsal pull of the muscle into a dorsally directed
adductive movement regardless of the initial angle of the jaw. This is the generalized mammalian
condition.

With the development of the secondary palate the area previously available for the origin of
large anterior pterygoid muscles was reduced. The development of the masseter extending posteroventrally
from an anterior origin presumably paralleled the reduction of the anterior pterygoids. The
therapsid masseter, as an external muscle unhindered by the crowding of surrounding organs,
was readily available for the many modifications that have been achieved among the mammals.

In the course of synapsid evolution leading to mammals, the temporal presumably became the
main muscle mass acting in adduction of the lower jaw. Its primacy is reflected in the phyletic
expansion of the temporal openings to permit greater freedom of the muscles during contraction.
In the synapsids that lead to mammals, there is no similar change in the region of the palate
that can be ascribed to the effect of the pterygoid musculature, even though these adductors,
like the temporal, primitively were subjected to severe limitations of space.

Didelphis

Dissections reveal the following relationships of the external adductors of the jaw in Didelphis
marsupialis (Fig. 8).

     1. MASSETER

     Origin: ventral surface of zygomatic arch.

     Insertion: posteroventral and lateroventral surface of
     mandible.

     2. EXTERNAL TEMPORALIS Origin: sagittal crest; anteriorly
     with internal temporalis from frontal bone; posteriorly with
     internal temporalis from interparietal bone.

     Insertion: lateral surface of coronoid process of mandible.

     3. INTERNAL TEMPORALIS

     Origin: sagittal crest and skull roof, including posterior
     two-thirds of frontal bone, whole of parietal, and
     dorsalmost portions of squamosal and alisphenoid.

     Insertion: medial surface of coronoid process; dorsal edge
     of coronoid process.

Temporal Openings

In discussions of the morphology and functions of the adductor mechanism of the lower jaw,
the problem of accounting for the appearance of temporal openings in the skull is often encountered.
Two patterns of explanation have evolved. The first has been the attempt to ascribe to the
constant action of the same selective force the openings from their inception in primitive
members of a phyletic line to their fullest expression in terminal members. According to this
theory, for example, the synapsid opening appeared originally to allow freer expansion of the
adductor muscles of the jaw during contraction, and continued selection for that character
caused the openings to expand until the ultimately derived therapsid or mammalian condition
was achieved.

The second course has been the attempt to explain the appearance of temporal openings in whatever
line in which they occurred by the action of the same constant selective force. According to
the reasoning of this theory, temporal fenestration in all groups was due to the need to decrease
the total weight of the skull, and selection in all those groups where temporal fenestration
occurs was to further that end.

Both of these routes of inquiry are inadequate. If modern views of selection are applied to
the problem of explaining the appearance of temporal fenestrae, the possibility cannot be ignored
that:

     1. Selective pressures causing the inception of temporal
     fenestrae differed from those causing the continued
     expansion of the fenestrae.

     2. The selective pressures both for the inception and
     continued expansion of the fenestrae differed from group to
     group.

     3. Selection perhaps involved multiple pressures operating
     concurrently.

     4. Because of different genotypes the potential of the
     temporal region to respond to selective demands varied from
     group to group.

Secondly, the vectors of mechanical force associated with the temporal region are complex (Fig.
9). Presumably it was toward a more efficient mechanism to withstand these that selection on
the cheek region was operating. The simpler and more readily analyzed of these forces are:

     1. The force exerted by the weight of the skull anterior to
     the cheek and the distribution of that weight depending
     upon, for example, the length of the snout in relation to
     its width, and the density of the bone.

     2. The weight of the jaw pulling down on the suspensorium
     when the jaw is at rest and the compression against the
     suspensorium when the jaw is adducted; the distribution of
     these stresses depending upon the length and breadth of the
     snout, the rigidity of the anterior symphysis, and the
     extent of the quadrate-articular joint.

     3. The magnitude and extent of the vectors of force
     transmitted through the occiput from the articulation with
     the vertebral column and from the pull of the axial
     musculature.

     4. The downward pull on the skull-roof by the adductor
     muscles of the mandible.

     5. The lateral push exerted against the cheek by the
     expansion of the mandibular adductors during contraction.

     6. The necessity to compensate for the weakness in the skull
     caused by the orbits, particularly in those kinds of
     primitive tetrapods in which the orbits are large.

The distribution of these stresses is further complicated and modified by such factors as:

     1. The completeness or incompleteness of the occiput and the
     location and extent of its attachment to the dermal roof.

     2. The size and rigidity of the braincase and palate, and
     the extent and rigidity of their contact with the skull.

The stresses applied to the cheek fall into two groups. The first includes all of those stresses
that ran through and parallel to the plane of the cheek initially. The weight of the jaw and
snout, the pull of the axial musculature, and the necessity to provide firm anchorage for the
teeth created stresses that acted in this manner. The second group comprises those stresses
that were applied initially at an oblique angle to the cheek and not parallel to its plane.
Within this group are the stresses created by the adductors of the jaw, pulling down and medially
from the roof, and sometimes, during contraction, pushing out against the cheek.

It is reasonable to assume that the vectors of these stresses were concentrated at the loci
of their origin. For example, the effect of the forces created by the articulation of the jaw
upon the skull was concentrated at the joint between the quadrate, quadratojugal, and squamosal
bones. From this relatively restricted area, the stresses radiated out over the temporal region.
Similarly, the stresses transmitted by the occiput radiated over the cheek from the points
of articulation of the dermal roof with the occipital plate. In both of these examples, the
vectors paralleled the plane of the cheek bones. Similar radiation from a restricted area,
but of a secondary nature, resulted from stresses applied obliquely to the plane of the cheek.
The initial stresses caused by the adductors of the jaw resulted from muscles pulling away
from the skull-roof; secondary stresses, created at the origins of these muscles, radiated
out over the cheek, parallel to its plane.

The result of the summation of all of those vectors was a complex grid of intersecting lines
of force passing in many directions both parallel to the plane of the cheek and at the perpendicular
or at an angle oblique to the perpendicular to the plane of the cheek.

Complexities are infused into this analysis with the division of relatively undifferentiated
muscles into subordinate groups. The differentiation of the muscles was related to changing
food habits, increased mobility of the head, and increase in the freedom of movement of the
shoulder girdle and forelimbs (Olson, 1961:214). As Olson has pointed out, this further localized
the stresses to which the bone was subjected. Additional localization of stresses was created
with the origin and development of tetrapods (reptiles) that were independent of an aquatic
environment and were subjected to greater effects of gravity and loss of bouyancy in the migration
from the aqueous environment to the environment of air. The localization of these stresses
was in the border area of the cheek, away from its center.

What evidence is available to support this analysis of hypothetical forces transmitted through
the fully-roofed skull of such an animal as Captorhinus?

It is axiomatic that bones or parts of bones that are subject to increased stress become thicker,
at least in part. This occurs ontogenetically, and it occurs phylogenetically through selection.
Weak bones will not be selected for. Figure 10 illustrates the pattern of the areas of the
skull-roof in the temporal region that are marked on the internal surface by broad, low thickened
ridges. The position of these ridges correlates well with the position of the oriented stresses
that were presumably applied to the skull of Captorhinus during life. It can be seen from Figure
10 that the central area of the cheek is thinner than parts of the cheek that border the central
area. The thickened border areas were the regions of the cheek that were subjected to greater
stress than the thin central areas.

External evidence of stress may also be present. The pattern of sculpturing of Captorhinus
is presented in Figure 11. The longer ridges are arranged in a definite pattern. Their position
and direction correlates well with the thickened border of the cheek, the region in which the
stresses are distinctly oriented. For example, a ridge is present on the internal surface of
the squamosal along its dorsal border. Externally, the sculptured ridges are long and roughly
parallel, both to each other and to the internal ridge.

The central area of the cheek is characterized by a reticulate pattern of short ridges, without
apparent orientation. The thinness of the bone in this area indicates that stresses were less
severe here. The random pattern of the sculpture also indicates that the stresses passed in
many directions, parallel to the plane of the cheek and obliquely to that plane.

Possible Explanation for the Appearance of Temporal Openings

Bone has three primary functions: support, protection and participation in calcium metabolism.
Let us assume that the requirements of calcium metabolism affect the mass of bone that is selected
for, but do not grossly affect the morphology of the bones of that mass. Then selection operates
to meet the needs for support within the limits that are set by the necessity to provide the
protection for vital organs. After the needs for protection are satisfied, the remaining variable
and the one most effective in determining the morphology of bones is selection for increased
efficiency in meeting stress.

Let us also assume that bone increases in size and/or compactness in response to selection
for meeting demands of increased stress, but is selected against when requirements for support
are reduced or absent. Selection against bone could only be effective within the limits prescribed
by the requirements for protection and calcium metabolism.

We may therefore assume that there is conservation in selection against characters having multiple
functions. Since bone is an organ system that plays a multiple role in the vertebrate organism,
a change in the selective pressures that affect one of the roles of bone can only be effective
within the limits set by the other roles. For example, selection against bone that is no longer
essential for support can occur only so long as the metabolic and protective needs of the organism
provided by that character are not compromised. If a character no longer has a positive survival
value and is not linked with a character that does have a positive survival value, then the
metabolic demands for the development and maintenance of that character no longer have a positive
survival value. A useless burden of metabolic demands is placed upon the organism because the
character no longer aids the survival of the organism. If selection caused, for example, muscles
to migrate away from the center of the cheek, the bone that had previously provided support
for these muscles would have lost one of its functions. If in a population of such individuals,
variation in the thickness of the bone of the cheek occurred, those with thinner bone in the
cheek would be selected for, because less metabolic activity was diverted to building and maintaining
what is now a character of reduced functional significance. A continuation of the process would
eliminate the bone or part of the bone in question while increasing the metabolic efficiency
of the organism. The bone is no longer essential for support, the contribution of the mass
of bone to calcium metabolism and the contribution of this part of the skeleton to protection
have not been compromised, and the available energy can be diverted to other needs.

The study of Captorhinus has indicated that the central area of the cheek was subjected to
less stress than the border areas. A similar condition in basal reptiles may well have been
present. A continued trend in reducing the thickness of the bone of the cheek in the manner
described above may well have resulted in the appearance of the first reptiles with temporal
fenestrae arising from the basal stock.

Such an explanation adequately accounts for an increased selective advantage in the step-by-step
thinning of the cheek-wall prior to the time of actual breakthrough. It is difficult to see
the advantage during such stages if explanations of weight reduction or bulging musculature
are accepted.

After the appearance of temporal fenestrae, selection for the classical factors is quite acceptable
to explain the further development of fenestration. The continued enlargement of the temporal
fenestrae in the pelycosaur-therapsid lineage undoubtedly was correlated with the advantages
accrued from securing greater space to allow increased lateral expansion of contracting mandibular
adductors. Similarly, weight in absolute terms can reasonably be suggested to explain the dramatic
fenestration in the skeletons of many large dinosaurs.

Literature Cited

ADAMS, L. A.

     1919. Memoir on the phylogeny of the jaw muscles in recent
           and fossil vertebrates. Annals N. Y. Acad. Sci.,
           28:51-166, 8 pls.

ESTES, R.

     1961. Cranial anatomy of the cynodont reptile Thrinaxodon
           liorhinus. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., 125(6):165-180,
           4 figs., 2 pls.

HOTTON, N.

     1960. The chorda tympani and middle ear as guides to origin
           and development of reptiles. Evolution, 14(2):194-211,
           4 figs.

OLSON, E. C.

     1961. Jaw mechanisms: rhipidistians, amphibians, reptiles.
           Am. Zoologist, 1(2):205-215, 7 figs.

ROMER, A. S.

     1928. Vertebrate faunal horizons in the Texas Permo-Carboniferous
           redbeds. Univ. Texas Bull., 2801:67-108, 7 figs.

     1956. Osteology of the reptiles. Univ. Chicago Press, xxii +
           772 pp., 248 figs.

ROMER, A. S. and PRICE, L. I.

     1940. Review of the Pelycosauria. Geol. Soc. Amer. Special
           Papers, No. 28, x + 538 pp., 71 figs., 46 pls.

WATSON, D. M. S.

     1948. Dicynodon and its allies. Proc. Zool. Soc. London,
           118:823-877, 20 figs., 1 pl.

     1954. On Bolosaurus and the origin and classification of
           reptiles. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., 111(9):200-449,
           37 figs.

     Transmitted December 5, 1963.

30-1522

