German imperialism is still engaged in a fierce annexationist struggle with English and American
militarism. Only because of this is the conclusion of peace between Russia and Germany at all
possible. We must fully avail ourselves of this situation. The welfare of the Revolution is
the highest law. We should accept the peace which we are unable to reject; we must secure a
breathing spell to be utilized for intensive work within the country and, especially, for the
creation of an army.

At the conference of the Communist party as well as at the Fourth Conference of the Soviet,
the peace partisans triumphed. They were joined by many of those who in January considered
it impossible to sign the Brest-Litovsk treaty. "Then," said they, "our signature would have
been looked upon by the English and French workingmen as a shameful capitulation, without an
attempt to fight. Even the base insinuations of the Anglo-French chauvinists to the secret
compact between the Soviet Government and the Germans, might in case that treaty had been signed
find credence in certain circles of European laborers. But after we had refused to sign the
treaty, after a new German invasion, after our attempt to resist it, and after our military
weakness had become painfully obvious to the whole world, after all this, no one dare to reproach
us for surrendering without a fight."

The Brest-Litovsk treaty, in its second enlarged edition, was signed and ratified.

In the meantime, the executioners were doing their work in Finland and the Ukraine, menacing
more and more the most vital centers of Great Russia. Thus the question of Russia's very existence
as an independent country is henceforth inseparably connected with the question of the European
revolution.

CONCLUSION

When our party took over the government, we knew in advance what difficulties we had to contend
with. Economically the country had been exhausted by the war to the very utmost. The revolution
had destroyed the old administrative machinery and could not yet create anything to take its
place. Millions of workers had been wrested from their normal nooks in the national economy
of things, declassified, and physically shattered by the three years' war. The colossal war
industries, carried on on an inadequately prepared national foundation, had drained all the
lifeblood of the people; and their demobilization was attended with extreme difficulties. The
phenomena of economic and political anarchy spread throughout the country. The Russian peasantry
had for centuries been held together by barbarian national discipline from below and iron-Czarist
rule from above. Economic development had undermined the former, the revolution destroyed the
latter. Psychologically, the revolution meant the awakening of a sense of human personality
among the peasantry. The anarchic manifestations of this awakening are but the inevitable results
of the preceding oppression. A new order of things, an order based on the workers' own control
of industry, can come only through gradual and internal elimination of the anarchic manifestations
of the revolution.

On the other hand, the propertied classes, even though deprived of political power, will not
relinquish their advantages without a fight. The Revolution has brought to a head the question
of private property in land and the tools of production--that is, the question of vital significance
to the exploiting classes. Politically this means ceaseless, secret or open civil war. In its
turn, civil war inevitably nourishes anarchical tendencies within the workingmen's movement.
With the disorganization of industries, of national finances, of the transportation and provisioning
systems, prolonged civil strife thus sets up tremendous difficulties in the way of constructive
organizing work. Nevertheless, the Soviet Government can look the future in the face with perfect
confidence. Only a careful inventory of all the country's resources; only a rational organization
of industries--an organization born of one general plan; only wise and careful distribution
of all the products, can save the country. And this is Socialism. Either a complete descent
to colonial status or a Socialist resurrection--these are the alternatives before which our
country finds itself.

The war has undermined the soil of the entire capitalistic world. Herein lies our unconquerable
strength. The imperialistic ring that is pressing around us will lie burst asunder by the proletarian
revolution. We do not doubt this for a minute, any more than we doubted during our decades
of underground struggle the inevitableness of the downfall of Czarism.

To struggle, to unite our forces, to establish industrial discipline and a Socialist regime,
to increase the productivity of labor, and to press on in the face of all obstacles--this is
our mission. History is working in our favor. The proletarian revolution will flare up, sooner
or later, both in Europe and America, and will bring emancipation not only to the Ukraine,
Poland, Lithuania, Courland, and Finland, but also to all suffering humanity.