"Ah! it's you, Ruth. Quite well, eh? There's a good child. Have an orange? That's right."

Then he would plunge into his reading again, and Ruth would climb slowly on to a great mahogany
chair placed ready for her, and watch him as she cut up her orange.

She wondered very much why people wrote him such long, long letters, all on blue paper and
tied up with pink tape. She felt sure they were not nice letters, for his face always looked
worried over them; and when he had finished he threw them on the floor, as though he were glad.
This made her so curious that she once ventured to ask him what they were. They were called
"briefs", he told her. But she was not much wiser; for, hearing from Nurse Smith that "brief"
was another word for short, she felt sure there must be some mistake.

Exactly as the clock struck eight Nurse's knock came at the door, Ruth got down from her chair
and said good-night.

Sometimes her father was so deeply engaged in his reading that he stared at her with a far-away
look in his eyes, as if he scarcely knew who she was. After a minute he said absently: "Bed-time,
eh? Good-night. Good-night, my dear." Sometimes when he was a little less absorbed he put a
sixpence or a shilling into her hand as he kissed her, and added: "There's something to spend
at the toy-shop."

Ruth received these presents without much surprise or joy. She was used to buying things, and
did not find it very interesting; for she could not hope for any sign of pleasure from her
dolls when she brought them new clothes or furniture.

It is a little dull when all one's efforts for people are received with a perfectly unmoved
face. She had once brought Nurse Smith a small china image, hoping that it would be an agreeable
surprise; but that had not been successful either. "Lor', my dear, don't you go spending your
money on me," she said. "Chany ornaments ain't much good for anything, to my thinking, 'cept
to ketch the dust."

Thus it came to pass that Ruth never talked much about what interested her either to her father
or to Nurse Smith, and as she had no brothers and sisters she was obliged to amuse herself
with fancied conversations. Sometimes these were carried on with her dolls, but her chief friend
was a picture which she passed every night on the staircase. It was of a man in a flat cap
and a fur robe, and he had a pointed smooth chin and narrow eyes, which seemed to follow her
slyly on her way. She did not like him and she did not actually fear him, but she had a feeling
that he listened to what she said, and that she must tell him any news she had. There was never
much except on "Aunt Clarkson's day", as she called it.

Aunt Clarkson was her father's sister. She lived in the country, and had many little boys and
girls whom Ruth had seldom seen, though she heard a great deal about them.

Once every month this aunt came up to London for the day, had long conversations with Nurse,
and looked carefully at all Ruth's clothes.

She was a sharp-eyed lady, and her visits made a stir in the house which was like a cold wind
blowing, so that Ruth was glad when they were over, though her aunt always spoke kindly to
her, and said: "Some day you must come and see your little cousins in the country."

She had said this so often without its having happened, however, that Ruth had come to look
upon it as a mere form of speech--part of Aunt Clarkson's visit, like saying "How d'ye do?"
or "Good-bye."

It was shortly after one of these occasions that quite by chance Ruth found a new friend, who
was better than either the dolls or the man in the picture, because, though it could not answer
her, it was really alive. She discovered it in this way.

One afternoon she and Nurse Smith had come in from their usual walk, and were toiling slowly
up from the hall to the nursery. The stairs got steeper at the last flight, and Nurse went
more slowly still, and panted a good deal, for she was stouter than she need have been, though
Ruth would never have dreamed of saying so. Ruth was in front, and she had nearly reached the
top when something came hurrying towards her which surprised her very much. It was a long,
lean, grey cat. It had a guilty look, as though it knew it had been trespassing, and squeezed
itself as close as it could against the wall as it passed.

"Pretty puss!" said Ruth softly, and put out her hand to stop it.

The cat at once arched up its back and gave a friendly little answering mew. Ruth wondered
where it came from. It was ugly, she thought, but it seemed a pleasant cat and glad to be noticed.
She rubbed its head gently. It felt hard and rough like Nurse's old velvet bonnet; there was
indeed no sleekness about it anywhere, and it was so thin that its sides nearly met.

"Poor puss!" said Ruth stroking it tenderly.

The cat replied by pushing its head gently against her arm, and presently began a low purring
song. Delighted, Ruth bent her ear to listen.

"Whoosh! Shish! Get along! Scat!" suddenly sounded from a few steps below. Nurse's umbrella
was violently flourished, the cat flew downstairs with a spit like an angry firework, and Ruth
turned round indignantly.

"You shouldn't have done that," she said, stamping her foot; "I wanted to talk to it. Whose is it?"

"It's that nasty kitchen cat," said Nurse, much excited, and grasping her umbrella spitefully.
"I'm not going to have it prowling about on my landing. An ugly thieving thing, as has no business
above stairs at all."

Ruth pressed her face against the balusters. In the distance below she could see the small
grey form of the kitchen cat making its way swiftly and silently downstairs. It went so fast
that it seemed to float rather than to run, and was soon out of sight.

"I should like to have played with it up in the nursery," she said, with a sigh, as she continued
her way. "I wish you hadn't frightened it away."

"Lor', Miss Ruth, my dear," answered Nurse, "what can a little lady like you want with a nasty,
low, kitchen cat! Come up and play with some of your beautiful toys, there's a dear! Do."

Nevertheless Ruth thought about the cat a great deal that afternoon, and the toys seemed even
less interesting than usual. When tea was over, and Nurse had taken up her sewing again, she
began to make a few inquiries.

"Where does that cat live?" she asked.

"In the kitchen, to be sure," said Nurse; "and the cellar, and coal-hole, and such like. Alonger
the rats and mice--and the beadles," she added, as an after-thought.

"The beadles!" repeated Ruth doubtfully. "What beadles?"

"Why, the black beadles, to be sure," replied Nurse cheerfully.

Ruth was silent. It seemed dismal company for the kitchen cat. Then she said:

"Are there many of them?"

"Swarms!" said Nurse, breaking off her thread with a snap. "The kitchen's black with 'em at night."

What a dreadful picture!

"Who feeds the cat?" asked Ruth again.

"Oh, I don't suppose nobody feeds it," answered Nurse. "It lives on what it ketches every now
and then."

No wonder it looked thin! Poor kitchen cat! How very miserable and lonely it must be with no
one to take care of it, and how dreadful for it to have such nasty things to eat! And the supply
even of these must be short sometimes, Ruth went on to consider. What did it do when it could
find no more mice or rats? Of the beetles she could not bear even to think. As she turned these
things seriously over in her mind she began to wish she could do something to alter them, to
make the cat's life more comfortable and pleasant. If she could have it to live with her in
the nursery for instance, she could give it some of her own bread and milk, and part of her
own dinner; then it would get fatter and perhaps prettier too. She would tie a ribbon round
its neck, and it should sleep in a basket lined with red flannel, and never be scolded or chased
about or hungry any more. All these pictures were suddenly destroyed by Nurse's voice:

"But I hope you'll not encourage it up here, Miss Ruth, for I couldn't abide it, and I'm sure
your Aunt Clarkson wouldn't approve of it neither. I've had a horror of cats myself from a
gal. They're that stealthy and treacherous, you never know where they mayn't be hiding, or
when they won't spring out at you. If ever I catch it up here I shall bannock it down again."

There was evidently no sympathy to be looked for from Nurse Smith; but Ruth was used to keeping
her thoughts and plans to herself, and did not miss it much. As she could not talk about it,
however, she thought of her new acquaintance all the more; it was indeed seldom out of her
mind, and while she seemed to be quietly amusing herself in her usual way, she was occupied
with all sorts of plans and arrangements for the cat when it should come to live in the nursery.
Meanwhile it was widely separated from her; how could she let it know that she wanted to see
it again? When she went up and down stairs she peered and peeped about to see if she could
catch a glimpse of its hurrying grey figure, and she never came in from a walk without expecting
to meet it on her way to the nursery. But she never did. The kitchen cat kept to its own quarters
and its own society. Perhaps it had been too often "bannocked" down again to venture forth.
And yet Ruth felt sure that it had been glad when she had spoken kindly to it. What a pity
that Nurse did not like cats!

She confided all this as usual to the man in the picture, who received it with his narrow observant
glance and seemed to give it serious consideration. Perhaps it was he who at last gave her
a splendid idea, which she hastened to carry out as well as she could, though remembering Nurse's
strong expression of dislike she felt obliged to do so with the greatest secrecy.

As a first step, she examined the contents of her little red purse. A whole shilling, a sixpence,
and a threepenny bit. That would be more than enough. Might they go to some shops that afternoon,
she asked, when she and Nurse were starting for their walk.

"To be sure, Miss Ruth; and what sort of shops do you want? Toy-shops, I suppose."

"N-no," said Ruth; "I think not. It must be somewhere where they sell note-paper, and a baker's,
I think; but I'm not quite sure."

Arrived at the stationer's, Ruth was a long time before deciding on what she would have; but
at last, after the woman had turned over a whole boxful, she came to some pink note-paper with
brightly painted heads of animals upon it, and upon the envelopes also.

"Oh!" cried Ruth when she saw it, clasping her hands with delight. "That would do beautifully.
Only--have you any with a cat?"

Yes, there was some with a nice fluffy cat upon it, and she left the shop quite satisfied with
her first purchase.

"And now," said Nurse briskly, whose patience had been a good deal tried, "we must make haste
back, it's getting late."

But Ruth had still something on her mind. She must go to one more shop, she said, though she
did not know exactly which. At last she fixed on a baker's.

"What should you think," she asked on the way, "that a cat likes to eat better than anything
in the world?"

"Why, a mouse to be sure," answered Nurse promptly.

"Well, but next to mice?" persisted Ruth.

"Fish," said Nurse Smith.

"That would never do," thought Ruth to herself as she looked at a fish-shop they were passing,
"It's so wet and slippery I couldn't possibly carry it home. Perhaps Nurse doesn't really know
what cats like best. Anyhow, I'm sure it's never tasted anything so nice as a Bath bun." A
Bath bun was accordingly bought, carried home, and put carefully away in the doll's house.
And now Ruth felt that she had an important piece of business before her. She spread out a
sheet of the new writing-paper on the window-seat, knelt in front of it with a pencil in her
hand, and ruled some lines. She could not write very well, and was often uncertain how to spell
even short words; so she bit the end of her pencil and sighed a good deal before the letter
was finished. At last it was done, and put into the envelope. But now came a new difficulty:
How should it be addressed? After much thought she wrote the following:

    THE KITCHEN CAT,
        The Kitchen,
            17 Gower Street.

CHAPTER II

Her Best Friend

After this letter had been dropped into the pillar-box just in front of the house, Ruth began
to look out still more eagerly for the kitchen cat, but days passed and she caught no glimpse
of it anywhere.

It was disappointing, and troublesome too, because she had to carry the Bath bun about with
her so long. Not only was it getting hard and dry, but it was such an awkward thing for her
pocket that she had torn her frock in the effort to force it in.

"You might a' been carrying brick-bats about with you, Miss Ruth," said Nurse, "by the way
you've slit your pocket open."

This went on till Ruth began to despair. "I'll try it one more evening," she said to herself,
"and if it doesn't come then I shall give it up."

Once more, therefore, when she was ready to go downstairs, she took the bun out of the dolls'
house, where she kept it wrapped up in tissue paper, and squeezed it into her pocket. Rather
hopelessly, but still keeping a careful look-out, she proceeded slowly on her way, when behold,
just as she reached the top of the last flight, a little cringing grey figure crossed the hall
below.

"It's come!" she exclaimed in an excited whisper. "It's come at last!"

But though it had come, it seemed now the cat's greatest desire to go, for it was hurrying
towards the kitchen stairs.

"Puss! puss!" called out Ruth in an entreating voice as she hastily ran down. "Stop a minute!
Pretty puss!"

Startled at the noise and the patter of the quick little feet, the cat paused in its flight
and turned its scared yellow-green eyes upon Ruth.

She had now reached the bottom step, where she stood struggling to get the Bath bun out of
her small pocket, her face pink with the effort and anxiety lest the cat should go before she
succeeded.

"Pretty puss!" she repeated as she tugged at the parcel. "Don't go away."

One more desperate wrench, which gashed open the corner of the pocket, and the bun was out.
The cat looked on with one paw raised, ready to fly at the first sign of danger, as with trembling
fingers Ruth managed to break a piece off the horny surface. She held it out. The cat came
nearer, sniffed at it suspiciously, and then to her great joy took the morsel, crouched down,
and munched it up. "How good it must taste," she thought, "after the mice and rats."

By degrees it was induced to make further advances, and before long to come on to the step
where Ruth sat, and make a hearty meal of the bun which she crumbled up for it.

"I'm afraid it's dry," she said; "but I couldn't bring any milk, you know, and you must get
some water afterwards."

The cat seemed to understand, and replied by pushing its head against her, and purred loudly.
How thin it was! Ruth wondered as she looked gravely at it whether it would soon be fatter
if she fed it every day. She became so interested in talking to it, and watching its behaviour,
that she nearly forgot she had to go into the dining-room, and jumped up with a start.

"Good-night," she said. "If you'll come again I'll bring you something else another day." She
looked back as she turned the handle of the heavy door. The cat was sitting primly upright
on the step washing its face after its meal. "I expect it doesn't feel so hungry now," thought
Ruth as she went into the room.

The acquaintance thus fairly begun was soon followed by other meetings, and the cat was often
in the hall when Ruth came downstairs, though it did not appear every evening. The uncertainty
of this was most exciting, and "Will it be there to-night?" was her frequent thought during
the day. As time went on, and they grew to know each other better, she began to find the kitchen
cat a far superior companion to either her dolls or the man in the picture. True, it could
not answer her any more than they did--in words, but it had a language of its own which she
understood perfectly. She knew when it was pleased, and when it said "Thank you" for some delicacy
she brought for it; its yellow eyes beamed with sympathy and interest when she described the
delights of that beautiful life it would enjoy in the nursery; and when she pitied it for the
darkness of its present dwelling below, she knew it understood by the way it rubbed against
her and arched up its back. There were many more pleasures in each day now that she had made
this acquaintance. Shopping became interesting, because she could look forward to the cat's
surprise and enjoyment when the parcel was opened in the evening; everything that happened
was treasured up to tell it when they met, or, if it was not there, to write to it on the pink
note-paper; the very smartest sash belonging to her best doll was taken to adorn the cat's
thin neck; and the secrecy which surrounded all this made it doubly delightful. Ruth had never
been a greedy child, and if Nurse Smith wondered sometimes that she now spent all her money
on cakes, she concluded that they must be for a dolls' feast, and troubled herself no further.
Miss Ruth was always so fond of "making believe". So things went on very quietly and comfortably,
and though Ruth could not discover that the kitchen cat got any fatter, it had certainly improved
in some ways since her attentions. Its face had lost its scared look, and it no longer crept
about as close to the ground as possible, but walked with an assured tread and its tail held
high. It could never be a pretty cat to the general eye, but when it came trotting noiselessly
to meet Ruth, uttering its short mew of welcome, she thought it beautiful, and would not have
changed it for the sleekest, handsomest cat in the kingdom.

But it was the kitchen cat still. All this did not bring it one step nearer to the nursery.
It must still live, Ruth often thought with sorrow, amongst the rats and mice and beetles.
Nothing could ever happen which would induce Nurse Smith to allow it to come upstairs. And
yet something did happen which brought this very thing to pass in a strange way which would
never have entered her mind.

The spring came on with a bright sun and cold sharp winds, and one day Ruth came in from her
walk feeling shivery and tired. She could not eat her dinner, and her head had a dull ache
in it, and she thought she would like to go to bed. She did not feel ill, she said, but she
was first very hot and then very cold. Nurse Smith sent for the doctor; and he came and looked
kindly at her, and felt her pulse and said she must stay in bed and he would send some medicine.
And she went to sleep, and had funny dreams in which she plainly saw the kitchen cat dressed
in Aunt Clarkson's bonnet and cloak. It stood by her bed and talked in Aunt Clarkson's voice,
and she saw its grey fur paws under the folds of the cloak. She wished it would go away, and
wondered how she could have been so fond of it. When Nurse came to give her something she said
feebly:

"Send the cat away."

"Bless you, my dear, there's no cat here," she answered. "There's nobody been here but me and
Mrs. Clarkson."

At last there came a day when she woke up from a long sleep and found that the pain in her
head was gone, and that the things in the room which had been taking all manner of queer shapes
looked all right again.

"And how do you feel, Miss Ruth, my dear?" asked Nurse, who sat sewing by the bedside.

"I'm quite well, thank you," said Ruth. "Why am I in bed in the middle of the day?"

"Well, you haven't been just quite well, you know," said Nurse.

"Haven't I?" said Ruth. She considered this for some time, and when Nurse came to her with
some beef-tea in her hand, she asked:

"Have I been in bed more than a day?"

"You've been in bed a week," said Nurse. "But you'll get along finely now, and be up and about
again in no time."

Ruth drank her beef-tea and thought it over. Suddenly she dropped her spoon into the cup. The
kitchen cat! How it must have missed her if she had been in bed a week. Unable to bear the
idea in silence, she sat up in bed with a flushed face and asked eagerly:

"Have you seen the cat?"

Nurse instantly rose with a concerned expression, and patted her soothingly on the shoulder.

"There now, my dear, we won't have any more fancies about cats and such. You drink your beef-tea
up and I'll tell you something pretty."

Ruth took up her spoon again. It was of no use to talk to Nurse about it, but it was dreadful
to think how disappointed the cat must have been evening after evening. Meanwhile Nurse went
on in a coaxing tone:

"If so be as you make haste and get well, you're to go alonger me and stay with your Aunt Clarkson
in the country. There now!"

Ruth received the news calmly. It did not seem a very pleasant prospect, or even a very real
one to her.

"There'll be little boys and girls to play with," pursued Nurse, trying to heighten the picture;
"and flowers--and birds and such--and medders, and a garding, and all manner."

But nothing could rouse Ruth to more than a very languid interest in these delights. Her thoughts
were all with her little friend downstairs; and she felt certain that it had often been hungry,
and no doubt thought very badly of her for her neglect. If she could only see it and explain
that it had not been her fault!

The next day Aunt Clarkson herself came. She always had a great deal on her mind when she came
up to town, and liked to get through her shopping in time to go back in the afternoon, so she
could never stay long with Ruth. She came bustling in, looking very strong, and speaking in
a loud cheerful voice, and all the while she was there she gave quick glances round her at
everything in the room. Ruth was well enough to be up, and was sitting in a big chair by the
nursery fire, with picture-books and toys near; but she was not looking at them. Her eyes were
fixed thoughtfully on the fire, and her mind was full of the kitchen cat. She had tried to
write to it, but the words would not come, and her fingers trembled so much that she could
not hold the pencil straight. The vexation and disappointment of this had made her head ache,
and altogether she presented rather a mournful little figure.

"Well, Nurse, and how are we going on?" said Aunt Clarkson, sitting down in the chair Nurse
placed for her. Remembering her dream, Ruth could not help giving a glance at Aunt Clarkson's
hands. They were fat, round hands, and she kept them doubled up, so that they really looked
rather like a cat's paws.

"Well, ma'am," replied Nurse, "Miss Ruth's better; but she's not, so to say, as cheerful as
I could wish. Still a few fancies ma'am," she added in an undertone, which Ruth heard perfectly.

"Fancies, eh?" repeated Aunt Clarkson in her most cheerful voice. "Oh, we shall get rid of
them at Summerford. You'll have real things to play with there, Ruth, you know. Lucy, and Cissie,
and Bobbie will be better than fancies, won't they?"

Ruth gave a faint little nod. She did not know what her aunt meant by "fancies". The cat was
quite as real as Lucy, or Cissie, or Bobbie. Should she ask her about it, or did she hate cats
like Nurse Smith? She gazed wistfully at Mrs. Clarkson's face, who had now drawn a list from
her pocket, and was running through the details half aloud with an absorbed frown.

"I shall wait and see the doctor, Nurse," she said presently; "and if he comes soon I shall
just get through my business, and catch the three o'clock express."

No, it would be of no use, Ruth concluded, as she let her head fall languidly back against
the pillow--Aunt Clarkson was far too busy to think about the cat.

Fortunately for her business, the doctor did not keep her waiting long. Ruth was better, he
said, and all she wanted now was cheering up a little--she looked dull and moped. "If she could
have a little friend, now, to see her, or a cheerful companion," glancing at Nurse Smith, "it
would have a good effect."

He withdrew with Mrs. Clarkson to the door, and they continued the conversation in low tones,
so that only scraps of it reached Ruth:

"--excitable--fanciful--too much alone--children of her own age--"

Aunt Clarkson's last remark came loud and clear:

"We shall cure that at Summerford, Dr. Short. We're not dull people there, and we've no time
for fancies."

She smiled, the doctor smiled, they shook hands and both soon went away. Ruth leant her head
on her hand. Was there no one who would understand how much she wanted to see the kitchen cat?
Would they all talk about fancies? What were Lucy and Cissie and Bobbie to her?--strangers,
and the cat was a friend. She would rather stroke its rough head, and listen to its purring
song, than have them all to play with. It was so sad to think how it must have missed her,
how much she wanted to see it, and how badly her head ached, that she felt obliged to shed
a few tears. Nurse discovered this with much concern.

"And there was master coming up to see you to-night and all, Miss Ruth. It'll never do for
him to find you crying, you know. I think you'd better go to bed."

Ruth looked up with a sudden gleam of hope, and checked her tears.

"When is he coming?" she asked. "I want to see him."

"Well, I s'pose directly he comes home--about your tea-time. But if I let you sit up we mustn't
have no more tears, you know, else he'll think you ain't getting well."

Ruth sank quietly back among her shawls in the big chair. An idea had darted suddenly into
her mind which comforted her very much, and she was too busy with it to cry any more. She would
ask her father! True, it was hardly likely that he would have any thoughts to spare for such
a small thing as the kitchen cat; but still there was just a faint chance that he would understand
better than Nurse and Aunt Clarkson. So she waited with patience, listening anxiously for his
knock and the slam of the hall door, and at last, just as Nurse was getting the tea ready,
it came. Her heart beat fast. Soon there was a hurried step on the stairs, and her father entered
the room. Ruth studied his face earnestly. Was he tired? Was he worried? Would he stay long
enough to hear the important question?

He kissed her and sat down near her.

"How is Miss Ruth to-day?" he said rather wearily to Nurse.

Standing stiffly erect behind Ruth's chair, Nurse Smith repeated all that the doctor and Mrs.
Clarkson had said.

"And I think myself, sir," she added, "that Miss Ruth will be all the better of a cheerful
change. She worrits herself with fancies."

Ruth looked earnestly up at her father's face, but said nothing.

"Worries herself?" repeated Mr. Lorimer, with a puzzled frown. "What can she have to worry
about? Is there anything you want, my dear?" he said, taking hold of Ruth's little hot hand
and bending over her.

The moment had come. Ruth gathered all her courage, sat upright, and fixing an entreating gaze
upon him said:

"I want to see my best friend."

"Your best friend, eh?" he answered, smiling as if it were a very slight affair. "One of your
little cousins, I suppose? Well, you're going to Summerford, you know, and then you'll see
them all. I forget their names. Tommie, Mary, Carry, which is it?"

Ruth gave a hopeless little sigh. She was so tired of these cousins.

"It's none of them," she said shaking her head. "I don't want any of them."

"Who is it, then?"

"It's the kitchen cat."

Mr. Lorimer started back with surprise at the unexpected words.

"The kitchen cat!" he repeated, looking distractedly at Nurse. "Her best friend! What does
the child mean?"

"Miss Ruth has fancies, sir," she began with a superior smile. But she did not get far, for
at that word Ruth started to her feet in desperation.

"It isn't a fancy!" she cried; "it's a real cat. I know it very well and it knows me. And I
do want to see it so. Please let it come."

The last words broke off in a sob.

Mr. Lorimer lifted her gently on to his knee.

"Where is this cat?" he said, turning to Nurse with such a frown that Ruth thought he must
be angry. "Why hasn't Miss Ruth had it before if she wanted it?"

"Well, I believe there is a cat somewhere below, sir," she replied in an injured tone; "but
I'd no idea, I'm sure, that Miss Ruth was worritting after it. To the best of my knowledge
she's only seen it once. She's so fond of making believe that it's hard to tell when she is
in earnest. I thought it was a kind of a fancy she got in her head when she was ill."

"Fetch it here at once, if you please."

Nurse hesitated.

"It's hardly a fit pet for Miss Ruth, sir."

"At once, if you please," repeated Mr. Lorimer. And Nurse went.

Ruth listened to this with her breath held, almost frightened at her own success. Not only
was the kitchen cat to be admitted, but it was to be brought by the very hands of Nurse herself.
It was wonderful--almost too wonderful to be true.

And now it seemed that her father wished to know how the kitchen cat had become her best friend.
He was very much interested in it, and she thought his face looked quite different while he
listened to her to what it looked when he was reading his papers downstairs. Finding that he
asked sensible questions, and did not once say anything about "fancies", she was encouraged
to tell him more and more, and at last leant her head on his shoulder and closed her eyes.
It would be all right now. She had found someone at last who understood.

The entrance of the kitchen cat shortly afterwards was neither dignified nor comfortable, for
it appeared dangling at the end of Nurse's outstretched arm, held by the neck as far as possible
from her own person. When it was first put down it was terrified at its new surroundings, and
it was a little painful to find that it wanted to rush downstairs again at once, in spite of
Ruth's fondest caresses. It was Mr. Lorimer who came to her help, and succeeded at last in
soothing its fears and coaxing it to drink some milk, after which it settled down placidly
with her in the big chair and began its usual song of contentment. She examined it carefully
with a grave face, and then looked apologetically at her father.

"It doesn't look its best," she said. "Its paws are white really, but I think it's been in
the coal-hole."

This seemed very likely, for not only its paws but the smart ribbon Ruth had tied round its
neck was grimy and black.

"It's not exactually pretty," she continued, "but it's a very nice cat. You can't think how
well it knows me--generally."

Mr. Lorimer studied the long lean form of the cat curiously through his eye-glass.

"You wouldn't like a white Persian kitten better for a pet--or a nice little dog, now?" he
asked doubtfully.

"Oh, please not," said Ruth with a shocked expression on her face. "I shouldn't love it half
so well, and I'm sure the kitchen cat wouldn't like it."

That was a wonderful evening. Everything seemed as suddenly changed as if a fairy had touched
them with her wand. Not only was the kitchen cat actually there in the nursery, drinking milk
and eating toast, but there was a still stranger alteration. This father was quite different
to the one she had known in the dining-room downstairs, who was always reading and had no time
to talk. His very face had altered, for instead of looking grave and far-away it was full of
smiles and interest. And how well he understood about the kitchen cat! When her bed-time came
he seemed quite sorry to go away, and his last words were:

"Remember, Nurse, Miss Ruth is to have the cat here whenever she likes and as long as she likes."

It was all so strange that Ruth woke up the next morning with a feeling that she had had a
pleasant dream. The kitchen cat and the new father would both vanish with daylight; they were
"fancies", as Nurse called them, and not real things at all. But as the days passed and she
grew strong enough to go downstairs as usual, it was delightful to find that this was not the
case. The new father was there still. The cat was allowed to make a third in the party, and
soon learned to take its place with dignity and composure. But though thus honoured, it no
longer received all Ruth's confidences. She had found a better friend. Her difficulties, her
questions, her news were all saved up for the evening to tell her father. It was the best bit
in the whole day.

On one of these occasions they were all three sitting happily together, and Ruth had just put
a new brass collar which her father had bought round the cat's neck.

"I don't want to go to Summerford," she said suddenly. "I'd much rather stay here with you."

"And the cat," added Mr. Lorimer as he kissed her. "Well, you must come back soon and take
care of us both, you know."

"You'll be kind to it when I'm gone, won't you?" said Ruth. "Because, you know, I don't think
the servants understand cats. They're rather sharp to it."

"It shall have dinner with me every night," said Mr. Lorimer.

In this way the kitchen cat was raised from a lowly station to great honour, and its life henceforth
was one of peace and freedom. It went where it would, no one questioned its right of entrance
to the nursery or dared to slight it in any way. In spite, however, of choice meals and luxury
it never grew fat, and never, except in Ruth's eyes, became pretty. It also kept to many of
its old habits, preferring liberty and the chimney-pots at night to the softly-lined basket
prepared for its repose.

But with all its faults Ruth loved it faithfully as long as it lived, for in her own mind she
felt that she owed it a great deal.

She remembered that evening when, a lonely little child, she had called it her "best friend".
Perhaps she would not have discovered so soon that she had a better friend still, without the
kitchen cat.

SARAH'S SUNDAY OUT

"Who saw Sarah last?"

It was Hester who had seen her last when she had said good-bye to a friend at the hall door.
That was at eleven o'clock in the morning; now it was one o'clock in the afternoon, and there
was no Sarah to be found anywhere. Not in the nursery, not in any of the bedrooms, not upstairs,
not downstairs; every hole and corner and crevice much too small to hide Sarah was thoroughly
searched. Her name was called in the fondest tones by every member of the family from father
and mother down to little Diana, and by all the servants, but there was no answer. There could
be no doubt about it--Sarah was lost!

Little Diana was heart-broken. It was dreadful to think of Sarah out alone in the noisy London
streets, where she knew no one and no one would know her, where she would soon get confused
and lose her way, and where all the houses looked so much alike that she would never, never
be able to find her home again. Perhaps even some wicked person might steal Sarah, or she might
be run over by a carriage, or bitten by a dog, or--there were no end of misfortunes which might
happen to her, for it made it all the more sad to remember that Sarah could not speak.

Who was Sarah?

Perhaps you may have been thinking that she was a little girl. Nothing of the kind. She was
the dearest little dog in the world, with a yellow and white silky coat, and a very turned-up
nose, and goggling, affectionate dark eyes. She was a gay-tempered little creature, full of
playful coaxing ways, and a great pet with everyone; but she was fondest of her mistress, Diana.
She went everywhere with her, knew her step from that of any of the other children, and would
prick up her ears and listen for it a long way off. Her whole name was "Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough",
and she was a Blenheim spaniel.

As befitted her rank, Sarah led a life of luxury, and had a great many possessions of her very
own. Smart collars and bells, a box full of different coloured ribbons, a travelling trunk
with her name upon it, a brush and comb, a warm coat for cold weather, and a comfortable basket
to sleep in. Everything that heart could desire for comfort or adornment was hers. She had
never been used to the least roughness or hardship, and certainly was too delicate to fight
her own way in the world.

And now Sarah was lost! All through that Sunday everyone was very much disturbed, and talked
of nothing but how they could find her. If a visitor came in, the conversation was all about
Sarah; but no one seemed to be very hopeful that she would be brought back. There were dog-stealers
about, they said, and such a little dog would be easily picked up and hidden. Poor Diana listened
to all this, and got more and more miserable as the day went on, for she began to feel quite
sure that she should never see her dear little dog again. She moped about, got very pale, would
not eat her dinner, and would have been in utter despair if Mother had not given her some comfort.
For Mother was the only person who thought there was a chance of Sarah's return, and this cheered
Diana, because she had a feeling that Mother knew everything.

Nevertheless when Monday morning came and there was no Sarah, Diana went downstairs in the
lowest spirits.

"Immediately after breakfast," said her mother, "I shall put on my bonnet and go out to look
for Sarah."

"Will you promise to bring her back?" asked poor little Diana earnestly.

Even Mother could not promise, but she would do her very best, and when she had started Diana
went up to the nursery somewhat comforted, to wait as patiently as she could for her return.

Long, long before that could possibly happen she stationed herself at the window, and fixed
her eyes on the busy street below. Carts, carriages, cabs, people, how they all went on and
on without a pause, full of their own business or pleasure! So many ladies, but not Mother;
so many dogs, small and big, but not one quite like Sarah. Diana's mouth began to droop more
and more with disappointment, and she was very near crying. Even Mother could not bring Sarah back!

"A watched kettle never boils, Miss Diana," said Nurse. "You'd much better come away from the
window and play, and then the time'd pass quicker."

But Diana would not move. Just as Nurse spoke she caught sight of a bonnet in the distance
just like Mother's, but she had been so often deceived that she hardly dared to hope. It came
nearer--it was opposite the house. Oh, joy! Mother's face, with an expression of triumphant
satisfaction upon it, looked up to the nursery window. No wonder it was triumphant, for under
her arm there appeared a yellow and white head, with silky ears and large dark eyes. Sarah
was found! It seemed almost too good to be true.

       *       *       *       *       *

