Pele was madly jealous, however. She turned the prince to stone on the crater brink,--the poor
fellow was growing used to dying now,--and, dismayed by this act of cruelty, Hiika descended
through the five spheres to the dark underworld where the spirits lived. She hoped that the
young man's ghost would follow her, for pity in his sufferings had fast increased to love.
As the spirit did not come, she returned to the surface of the earth and went on a voyage of
search in a boat that a god had lent to her,--a boat of cowrie shell, which in overland travel
would shrink so that it could be carried in the hand; then, at the word, would swell to a stately
barge of pearl with ivory masts and sails as white as the snow on the mountain. This vessel
moved with the speed of the wind in any direction the occupant indicated by pointing the finger.
The prince's wandering spirit was found in Kauai, its old home; was taken by a messenger to
the stone image on the crater, and put back into the body, and the prince lived again. Pele
was by this time in a soft and repentant humor. She asked forgiveness of Lohiau and bade him
love and wed her sister, who was good, and had earned his love. This Lohiau did, whereupon
Pele restored to life several of Hiika's friends whom, also, in her first anger, she had turned
to statues of lava.

A Visit of Pele

While a great storm was raging over Hawaii a boy was born to a woman chief in the camp of King
Alapai. At once the soothsayers proclaimed him as the man of prophecy who should conquer the
eight islands and end their strifes. It seemed as if for once--or oftener--the kahunas were
wrong, for the babe disappeared that very night. There were rumors of foul play; rumors that
Alapai had killed him, that he might not stand in the way of his own progeny, for this barbarian
Macbeth would have no Banquo to intercept his line or wrest the crown from him. It was five
years before the fate of the child was known. He was not dead: Naole, a chief, had kidnapped
him that the prophecy might come to pass. When the king heard of this he commanded that the
boy be placed at court, where he might learn manners and the laws, and be kept under the eyes
of the great; but, doubting his master's motive, Naole did not send the child; he sent another
of the same age, who was to cut no figure in the history of the islands, not being the favored
of the gods.

The real prince was kept in so secluded a place and the secret of his parentage so well preserved--it
was prophecy that he should be fathered of three kings--that he had reached the age of twenty
before Naole deemed it safe to let him mingle with the multitude. He then made it known that
the young man was Kamehameha. By this time King Alapai was dead, or helpless with age; but
the prince, albeit liberal and just, was rough, strong, dictatorial, a natural military leader,
and he did not lack enemies. Worst among these was his uncle, Pepehi, an elderly chief, who
had read omens in the entrails of sacrifice warning him to be discreet and guarded in his life
or it would be taken from him by one related to him, and of greater power. He could not brook
the thought of Kamehameha's ascendency, for he was a man used to deference, a man of weight
and dignity, while this new-found prince was a boor. He therefore made himself unpleasant by
criticisms and carpings, by false interpretations of signs, by implications against his nephew,
and finding that the young man did not retaliate, he resolved to have his life.

Pretending anger with Kamehameha because he would not study for the priesthood and succeed
to his honors, the soothsayer dinned a tirade into his ears in the temple ground, hoping to
receive a blow, that he might stab, in return, for he wished the killing to appear as if done
in self-defence. Stung by his insolence, Kamehameha did knock him down: a good, stout blow,
well won. So soon as he had recovered his wits and got upon his feet the priest plucked out
his long bone knife and made a stroke, but the priestess of the temple, her eyes blazing with
anger at this trespass, caught his wrist and cried, "Down to your knees! Ask pardon of your
future king and mercy of the gods."

At that instant came a rush of wings and a blaze of light filling the temple space. All fell
to the earth, for they had recognized the tall form before them with the coronet of vari-colored
sparks bound on the golden hair that swept around it like a cloud of glory, and the robe of
tissue that was like flame of silver whiteness. It was the volcano goddess.

"Peace!" she commanded. "This boy is in the charge of Pele. Let no hand be lifted against him.
No knife, no art, no poison, and no spell shall shorten his life. He will be your greatest
king: your best. He will put an end to these wretched wars between your families, and prepare
for the day when a pale race will come to these lands, making them a step in their conquering
march around the world. As for you, Pepehi, speak another word against those I love, lift a
hand against them, and I turn you to a cinder. Aloha!" She had vanished like flame. Kamehameha,
on this revelation of his destiny, sprang to his feet. His breath was quick and strong, a smile
was on his lips, and he looked into the distance with lifted face and flashing eye, as if a
glorious vision had arisen there. A touch on his foot brought him to himself. Pepehi was grovelling
before him, baring his breast and offering to Kamehameha the poisoned dagger he had but a few
moments before aimed at the young king's heart. Lifting him from the ground, Kamehameha comforted
the priest with a few words and sent him homeward with bowed head and dragging step.

The Great Famine

Hua, the licentious king of Maui,--who kept a hundred hula dancers, was drunk for days together
on awa, and spared no wife or daughter of a friend or subject if she took his fancy,--had been
chafing under the restraints imposed or attempted by his high priest, a blameless man whose
age and long service should have gained even a king's consideration. It was approaching a new-year
feast (the end of December), toward the close of the twelfth century, and Hua had made such
levies on his people for useless wars and wasteful orgies that the old man was moved to protest.
Hua paid no attention to him, but loudly ordered his hunters to go to the mountains and bring
him some water-birds for his table.

"Those birds can be found only by the sea," ventured the priest.

"You countermand my orders, do you?" roared the monarch.

"I gave no order," protested the venerable man.

"Hark you," insisted the king. "My men are going to the mountain. If they find the birds there--and
they will--you shall be slain as a rebel and a false prophet."

Seeing that his master desired his death, the priest bowed and made no answer. He went to his
sons, who were studying for the priesthood, prevailed on them to fly to Mount Haleakala, and
probably hoped to follow them, but being slow and lame with years, the hunters had returned
before he could escape. They bore their prey, the water-birds, and said they had found them
inland. Knowing this to be a lie, told by the king's command, the priest said, "These birds
came from the sea. You can smell it upon them. Look." And he cut open two or three of their
bodies. "Here are little fish and bits of seaweed they have eaten within the hour."

Enraged at the discovery of his paltry subterfuge, the king caught up a spear and thrust it
into the old man's heart. Though everything is permitted to a king, the people could not repress
a groan of horror, and one by one they stole away from the spot, fearful of what might follow
this sacrilege. Well might they fear. The body of the priest had barely reached the wooden
cross that marked the temple-ground as sacred when its bearers dropped it upon the earth and
fled, for a sudden fever smote the ground; hot, stifling winds began to blow; the images of
the gods wailed and moaned; the sky was red and dripped blood, and the altar that was to have
received the body sank through the rock, leaving a hole from which gushed steam and dust. At
that hour every well, brook, and spring in the island went dry, save a rill in a cave back
of Hana that the gods devoted to the daughter-in-law of the murdered priest and to the old
woman who attended her, while a nightly dew fell thereafter about the sons of the dead man,
providing drink to them and encouraging a growth of fruit and taro sufficient for their needs.

In a day or two the people were desperate. Their crops were withering, the forests shedding
their leaves. Some men killed their neighbors and drank their blood; others drank from the
ocean and their increased thirst drove them mad; a few took poison; several offered themselves
as sacrifices and were forthwith killed on the altars; but in vain. Prayer and offering were
unheeded. The wickedness of the people in submitting to a king like Hua had brought its punishment.
Frightened, repentant, maybe, Hua himself fled to Hawaii, and his retainers scattered themselves
in Molokai, Oahu, and Kauai. They could not escape the curse. Like the Wandering Jew, they
carried disaster with them. Blight, drouth, thirst, and famine appeared wherever they set foot,
and though the wicked king kept himself alive for three and a half years, he succumbed to hunger
and thirst at last, and in Kohala his withered frame ceased to be animate. To this day "the
rattle of Hua's bones in the sun" afford a simile in common speech. And the wrath of the gods
was heavy, so that the people died by thousands.

Hua being dead, the survivors looked anxiously for a return of rain and of life to the islands,
and many turned to Naula, of Oahu, imploring him to intercede with the gods in their behalf.
This priest was of great age, and was reverenced and feared. He could command the spirits of
the living, as well as the spirits of the dead, and talk with them, far from the place where
their bodies lay in trance. He had descended into hell, had risen to paradise, and had brought
back from the region of the blessed a calabash of the water of life. The animals knew and obeyed
him so well that when he journeyed to Kauai and his canoe capsized, a whale swallowed him and
vomited him forth on the beach at the very spot where he had intended to land, while at another
time two sharks towed his vessel against a head wind with such speed that the sea fowl could
hardly keep him in sight. Clearing his eye by a fast and prayer, he climbed to the topmost
height of the Waianae Mountains and closely scanned the horizon. The earth was as brick, and
the sky as brass, and the sea as silver, save in one quarter: a tiny blur on the universal
glare could be seen, he fancied, over Maui. He would wait, in order to be sure. Yes, in the
morning the vapor was still there.

"The sons of the murdered priest are in Maui. I will go to them," he said, and descending to
the shore he entered his canoe alone, with neither oar nor sail, yet in the dawn he was at
Maui, and the cloud was now plainly seen waving about the great peak of Hanaula. From their
eyrie on the mountain the two young men had seen the approach of Naula, for his boat shone
in the dark with a moon-like radiance. They knew that it bore some message for them, and when
the old man arrived at Makena landing they were there to meet him. His white beard swept the
earth as he bowed, and they bent low while waiting for him to speak. "You are the sons of the
most worthy priest who was slain by Hua," he said. "That evil man has expiated his crime, and
his bones lie unburied in the light. The people suffer and die. The punishment for Hua's crime
has been severe and long. Let us join our prayers to the gods that they may turn to mercy.
I am Naula."

The elder of the sons replied, "Great priest, we will gladly pray with you for our people,
but first tell me of my wife. Is she alive?"

The old man wrapped his head in his cloak and put against his forehead an amulet of stone.
After some moments of silence he flung off the covering and spoke, "She lives, and is well.
The gods have cared for her in the valley back of Hana."

This announcement carried joy to the heart of the questioner, and he began at once the erection
of an altar, the aged priest sprinkling it with blessed water and placing beside it the phallic
symbol of the trinity. The invocation was over, but no living creature appeared in the desert
to serve as a sacrifice. A rustling was heard among the dead bushes and the snout of a black
hog was thrust out. Before it could escape they had seized the creature, with a cry of joy,
lifted it to the altar, stabbed it again and again, and its blood flowed over the stones. Then
all bent about it and prayed with fervor. As they prayed their shadows grew fainter, and the
hot wind lulled. A low rumble was heard in the south. They looked up. The heavens were darkening.
The rain was coming. "Praise the gods, who are merciful and who receive our sacrifice!" the
priests cried. And with that immolation the days of suffering were over.

Kiha's Trumpet

Waipio, in Hawaii, is claimed by people who live thereabout to be the loveliest valley on the
island. It was a low and marshy stretch until a great fish that lived there begged the god
Kane to give him sweeter water and more of it. Kane therefore tumbled rocks across the stream,
so as to dam it into wide pools, and also opened new springs at the source. The marks of his
great hands are still seen on the stone. In this valley, now so peaceful and so rich in charm,
lived Kiha, king of Hawaii, in the earlier years of the fifteenth century, a great and dreaded
monarch. Of all his possessions he valued none more highly than his war-trumpet, a large shell
adorned with the teeth of chiefs who had been killed in war. The roar of this instrument could
be heard for ten miles, for it was a magic shell, and when blown in battle it reproduced the
cries of victory and shrieks of the dying; when blown to summon the people it was like the
gale in the forest, and when it called a sea-god to listen to a prayer it was like surges thundering
against the cliffs.

That day was long remembered when the horn was stolen. It had been taken from its wrapping
and its box, and a hideous mask of stone had been found in its place. Search availed nothing,
and the only comfort that the priests could offer was a promise of restoration by a being without
cloak or hands, when a cocoa palm, to be planted by the king at the next full moon, should
bear fruit. The tree was planted, but seven years passed before the nuts appeared. These were
eaten by the king, and on that very night a strange man was arrested on a charge of thieving
and taken before the king for sentence. All through the questioning a dog with one white eye
and a green one kept close beside the prisoner, appearing to understand every word that was
spoken. The intelligence of this animal was so remarkable as to divert all thought of punishment
for the time, and when the robber had given instances of the creature's more than human cleverness,
Kiha realized suddenly that this was the agency whereby the magic horn was to be restored to him.

If the dog could find and restore that shell the captive should not merely be set free, but
should be fed at the royal table for the rest of his life. On hearing this promise, the dog,
who had been watching the king so fixedly out of his green eye as to make his Majesty uncomfortable,
sprang up with a joyous bark, and capered about with every token of enthusiasm for the task
that was to be put upon him.

At the time when the trumpet disappeared from Kiha's house a band of mountebanks and thieves
disappeared from Hawaii. They had camped in the woods above Waipio, and had been stealing pigs,
fowls, fruit, and taro from the farmers, and had occasionally visited the settlements to show
their skill in juggling and hanky-panky, hoping to earn as a reward some drinks of the native
beer, and perhaps a weapon or a strip of cloth. It was the chief of this band who had stolen
the trumpet. He had learned its history,--how the god Lono had blown it on the top of Mauna
Kea until trees were uprooted in the blast that came from it, until the fires kindled in the
crater below and threw a red light against the stars, until the earth shook and the sea heaved
like a monster sighing. It had the voice of a god from that hour, and other gods obeyed it.
The band fled to Oahu with the prize and there led a graceless life until the populace drove
them out, and they returned to Hawaii.

The arrival of these suspicious characters had been reported to the king, and he suggested
that the dog seek the shell in their camp at the head of the valley. No sooner was the suggestion
made than the animal rushed away in that direction with the speed of the wind. Some hours passed,
and the night was wearing on wearily, when a tremendous burst of sound issued from the hills,
echoing far and wide. The king leaped to his feet, the men of his village roused and grasped
their spears, for this was the call to arms,--the first time they had heard it in seven years.
But who was blowing it? Nearer and nearer came the sky-shaking peal, and presently the dog,
bearing the magic shell in his mouth, ran in, sank at his master's feet, gasped, shook, stiffened.
He was dead from exhaustion.

His master, overcome with grief for the loss of his little friend, was liberated at once; then,
confident that the returned thieves had had the trumpet in their possession, the king led his
forces against them without waiting for the sun to rise, and slew nearly all. From one or two
survivors of the band he learned that their captain had offended them by his arrogance and
selfishness until they were forced to reduce him to their own state by silencing the instrument
whereby he called to the gods and gained their help. During one of his drunken sprees they
carried the shell to a wizard, who put a secret taboo mark on its lip, and when the pirate
blew it, on regaining his wits, it made only a low, dull moaning. Try as he would, he could
never restore it. It was chiefly to propitiate the gods and give its notes back to the trumpet
that he had returned to Hawaii.

When the dog seized the shell, as it lay on the earth near the sleeping chief, he bit off the
edge that had been marked by the wizard and instantly its voice came back. The wind blown into
it long before by the robber chief was now liberated in quantities in those tremendous blasts
that had roused the king and his people and appalled the robbers. In this respect it resembled
the post-horn of Baron Munchausen's story, which, on being hung before a fire, allowed the
notes that had been played into it (but not heard) to thaw out and entertain the company. And
if the story of the shell is doubted, one has only to look at it in the Honolulu Museum to
be convinced.

How Moikeha Gained a Wife

Puna, lord of Kauai, was a well-beloved and merciful man. Though he would not brook insolence,
he was always ready to pardon a fisherman or servant who, in ignorance of his personality,
broke the taboo by stepping on his shadow. His love for Hooipo, his daughter, was so strong
that he delayed her marriage until the gallants began to complain, and the girl herself became
uneasy, lest her charms should expand to a maturity that might hurt her matrimonial chances.
As she had no preference, however, she agreed that her father might name the happy man. He,
loth to incur the enmity of any at his court, resolved to offer her as a prize, and the fairest
contest seemed in his mind to be a run to Kaula and back, each contestant to be allowed to
use sail and carry four oarsmen, and the winner of the race to marry Hooipo.

A couple of days before the race was undertaken there arrived at Kauai a sturdy mariner, one
Moikeha, who had just returned from a voyage to Raiatea, two thousand five hundred miles to
the southward. Long trips of this sort were not unusual among the adventurous islanders, and
there is a tradition that one of them brought to Hawaii two white men who became priests, and
on a later exploration secured four "foreigners of large stature, bright, staring, roguish
eyes, and reddish faces," who may have been American Indians. Moikeha became the guest of Puna.
He had not been long in the daughter's company before Hooipo regretted the arrangement for
a race, for she had found a man whom she could love. It was too late to argue with the candidates;
there could be no hope of peace if the princess were withdrawn as an object of competition
and thrown at the head of this stranger. By general consent he was allowed to take part in
the race, provided he could cite an honorable parentage. This he did, for he was the son of
a former chief in Oahu, and he rattled off the names of his ancestors for sixteen generations,
ending the catalogue in this fashion, "Maweke and Niolaukea, husband and wife; Mulilealii and
Wehelani, husband and wife; Moikeha and Hooipo, husband and wife." This little joke, his assumption
that the girl was already his, made everybody laugh and put the company in good humor.

At the word of command a score or more of lusty fellows pushed their boats through the surf,
hoisted sail, and pointed their prows for Kaula, fifty miles away. Moikeha alone showed no
haste. He bade a cheerful farewell to his host and the pretty daughter, marked with delight
her serious look as he took his leave, then, with a single attendant and the smallest boat
in the fleet, he set off across the blue water. Directly that her sail was up the little craft
sprang through the sea as if blown by a hurricane, while the other boats slid over the glassy
waves under the push of oars. "It is the fish-god, Apukohai, who drags his canoe," declared
the rowers, as he passed. In twenty-four hours he was at the side of Kooipo with the whale-tooth,
proof of his voyage, that was delivered to him at Kaula by a servant who had been sent there
with it in advance. He was easily the victor, the other contestants arriving from one to three
days later. No objection being offered, the couple were married with rejoicings, and on the
death of Puna the husband became chief, and married off eight or ten youngsters of his own.
Not for a long time was it known that in the race for a wife his lone but potent companion
was Laamaomao, the wind-god, who, loosing favorable breezes from his magic calabash, that blew
whither he listed, carried him swiftly past all other competitors.

The Sailing of Paao

Paao, who afterward became a high priest in Hawaii, migrated thither in the eleventh century
from Samoa, after a quarrel with his brother, Lonopele. Both of these men were wizards, and
were persons of riches and influence. It came about that Lonopele had missed a quantity of
his choicest fruit, which was conveyed away at night, and although he could see visions and
tell fortunes for others, he could not reveal for his own satisfaction so simple a matter as
the source of these disappearances. In a foolish rage he accused his nephew, the son of Paao.
Paao was indignant, but, with even greater foolishness, he killed his son, in order to open
the boy's stomach and prove that there was no fruit in it. This act so rankled in his mind
that he decided to leave the country and forget it, and to that end he built several strong
canoes and stored them well with food and water.

Before sailing, Paao revenged himself for his own folly by killing a son of Lonopele. The latter
discovered the murder too late to retaliate with weapons, so he summoned the powers of magic
to his aid. He sent a hurricane in chase of the receding boats, but a great fish pushed them
on, despite the wind, which was against them, while another friendly monster of the sea swam
around and around the little fleet, breaking the force of the waves. Lonopele then sent a colossal
bird to vomit over the canoes and sink them, but mats were put up in tent-form as protections,
and this project also failed.

Paao landed in Hawaii with about forty followers, one of whom was a powerful prophet. As the
canoes were setting off, several would-be wizards begged to be taken to the new land. Paao
called to them to leap into the sea, if they trusted their own powers, and he would take them
on board. All who jumped were killed by striking on rocks or by drowning,--all but the real
prophet, who did not leave the shore till the boats were a mile or so away from land. Paao
answered his thunderous hail by an equally thunderous refusal to return, as to go back after
starting was bad luck, but added, "There is room for you, if you will fly to us." Putting all
his strength into his arms and legs, the prophet swam through the air and reached the boats
without injury.

The real Paao is said to have been a Spanish priest who was cast away on the islands by the
wreck of the galleon Santo Iago in 1527. The ship was bound from Acapulco to Manila with shrines
and images. The priest grafted Christian practices on the native religion, abolished sacrifice,
and begat a line of chiefs.

The Wronged Wife

In 1530, or thereabout, a Spanish ship from Molucca was driven across the Pacific and flung,
in a dismantled condition, on the Keei Reefs, Hawaii. Only the captain and his sister were
rescued. Until it was discovered that these strangers required food and sleep, like themselves,
the natives worshipped them as gods. They were hardly less welcome when it was found that they
were human, and they married among the islanders. The woman's grandchild, Kaikilani, was reputed
to be the most beautiful woman ever born in Hawaii. Kaikilani became the wife of the heir-apparent,
who cared so little for government, however, that the young woman was made chief. Her marriage
to this easy-going, ambitionless, though generous prince had been a failure. As it was a state
marriage, she cared little for him. His stalwart brother, Lono, was the object of her love
and admiration. When the people resolved that Lono should be king, Kaikilani was divorced and
given to him as queen, for her first husband prized her happiness above his own. Lono built
a yacht worthy of this Cleopatra, a double canoe eighty feet long and seven wide, floored and
enclosed for twenty feet amidships, so that the queen had an apartment which was luxuriously
furnished with couches, cloths, festoons of flowers, shells, and feathers, and containing a
sacred image and many charms against evil. The twin vessels were striped with black and yellow,
figures of big birds with men's heads were at the prow, and on calm days, when the sails hung
idly, forty oarsmen pulled the royal barge at a gallant rate.

During a long honeymoon tour the bridal party landed on Molokai, to await the passing of heavy
weather, and the young couple were playing draughts to beguile the time, when a dark and sudden
cloud fell upon their happiness. One of the servants of the queen was a girl named Kaikinani,
who had a lover, and while the king was studying his next move he heard a man's voice call,
as he thought, "Come, Kaikilani, your lover is waiting." The man was calling Kaikinani. He
abruptly asked his wife who had dared to address the queen in that easy fashion, and taking
her own surprise and confusion for a token of guilt, he struck her with the checker-board,
rushed away to the beach, ordered his private canoe to be launched, and seizing one of the
paddles, he rowed with his twenty attendants until he was exhausted. That night he gained the
shores of Oahu.

When Kaikilani had come out of a delirium of nine days, and understood the nature of the mistake
that had separated her from her husband, she hastily equipped her barge and began a search
for him,--a search that lasted for months. Lono, ensconced at the court of Oahu, was trying
to stifle his regrets; he would not reveal his name; he refused all companionship with women;
he worked at play most earnestly, hunting, rowing, swimming, surf-riding, racing, leaping,
casting the spear, halting at nothing that involved peril or that would tire him at night to
a forgetful sleep. His stay was drawing to an end. He was to sail for Hawaii in a day or two,
for rebellions were threatening in his absence, and his departure was none too early, for certain
of the gallants were jealous of his success in sports and of the unrewarded admiration that
the fair sex gave to him. One of these men taunted him with being a nameless chief. Lono, scowling
down on him, answered that he would tear the skin from his living body if he ever caught him
beyond his king's protection, and producing a big calabash filled with rebels' bones, he chanted
the names of those he had slain.

He was interrupted by a soft voice, outside of the enclosure, chanting his name-song. Who could
have learned his name? The court had risen. "Yes," he said, "the singer is true. I am Lono,
and she whom I hear is my wife. The gods be praised."

Leaping the wall, he found, as he had hoped, Kaikilani, smiling through her tears. He held
her in a long embrace. Next day they returned to their native island, where they reigned to
an old and happy age.

The Magic Spear

Kaululaau, prince of Maui, had misbehaved so grossly, painting the sacred pigs, imitating the
death-bird's call before the doors of nervous people, opening the gates of fish-ponds, tippling
awa, and consorting with hula dancers, that his father, believing him to be incorrigible, shipped
him off to Lanai in disgust. Knowing that island to be infested with gnomes, dragons, and monsters,
the lad would fain have turned the usual new leaf, but he had promised reform so many times
and failed that his father was deaf to his pleadings. Just before he embarked the old high
priest called him aside--he always had a soft spot in his heart for this scape-grace--and entrusted
to him an ivory spear which had been dipped in the river of the dead and left on an altar by
Lono, the third person of the trinity. With that, which was both weapon and talisman, the possessor
need fear nothing.

Kaululaau had been but a little while in his new home when he was compelled to put his gift
to use. There were malignant beings on Lanai who hurt people, hogs, fowls; blighted cocoanuts,
bananas, and taro patches, and were a common sorrow to the inhabitants. Worst among these tormentors
was the gnome Mooaleo, who, in the guise of a big mole, burrowed under houses and caused them
to settle, with a thump. The prince caught this fellow within a circle he had drawn on the
earth, for the witchery of the spear was so strong that the effect of drawing that line was
felt to the centre of the globe. Burrow as he would,--and he did burrow until he reached fire,--Mooaleo
could not escape from it. The magic barrier confined him like iron. He came to the air at last
and begged to be released, promising to leave the island forever, if he might gain his liberty.
Kaululaau rubbed out twenty or thirty yards of the enchanted line, whereupon the creature rushed
madly through the gap and dived into the sea, never again emerging in the sight of men.

For a year the prince kept up his war against the demons and slew or banished every one of
them. For this the men rewarded him with praise and gifts and service, the women with love,
the children with trust. He was glad he had been exiled. Of course, so soon as his father heard
of his changed life and his courage in knight-errantry he repented his hardness of spirit and
sent messengers to bid Kaululaau return. This was an unwelcome summons, and while he dared
not refuse, he took his own time in getting home again, his alleged reason for delay being
that he wished to see the world and further instruct himself; his real reason being a love
of praise and adventure. He stirred up strife in Hawaii; visited, without harm, the wind-god's
home on Molokai and Kalipahoa's poison grove, and on Oahu found another chance to win the people's
favor. A bird so huge that its head weighed near two hundred pounds had been depredating among
the villages, tearing children from their mothers and killing domestic animals, yet always
defended by the priests, who, having confused it with a strange species of owl, considered
it as sacred. The rover did not ask permission to slay it. Nobody knew him, or guessed why
he was going among the hills. He came upon the bird in the mountains, when its beak was dripping
with human blood, and at a mile distance hurled the spear, which flew through the air, as if
self-directed, and pierced the creature through and through. For this he was arrested and consigned
to the sacrificial altar; but when he abandoned his disguise, appeared in the feather cloak
and helmet of a chief, and made known that he was Kaululaau, the trembling, stammering priest
owned that he was mistaken in supposing the bird to be taboo. Its huge head was produced; its
eyes rolled, its jaws clashed, and with a scream an evil human spirit that had lived in its
body flew into the air. The ne'er-do-weel had a royal reception when he returned. Finding that
his old friend, the high priest, was dead, he fulfilled a promise by secretly burying the magic
spear-point in his grave.

Hawaiian Witches

To the native Hawaiian, who shuns work, dresses only for decorative purposes, and is willing
to subsist on fruits that grow without teasing, life is not so simple as we should suppose,
to look at him. Nature abhors a vacuum, even in a man's head, and when the man cares to put
nothing in his noddle that will increase his understanding and resource, his ancestry will
have planted something there which is sure to swell and grow until it may dominate his conduct
and his fate. And if you open the head of an average barbarian you will find a flourishing
crop of superstition fungi inside. So surely as he is a barbarian he will believe in witches.
If he contents himself with imagining wizards and spooks, he may find recreation enough in
the dark, but when he accuses other people of practising against him, and gets them hanged
or roasted, his imagination has become too frisky to be at large. Death for the practice of
witchcraft is no longer possible, however, unless it results from private revenge.

To this day fear and ignorance paint gnomes and elves in the palm groves and among the wild
Java uplands of the mid-Pacific, and Honolulu itself is not free from the lingering and traditionary
kahuna. This is the wizard, or medicine man, or voodoo worker, who does by prayer and spell
what his employers would do with a club if it were not for the awkward institution of the law.
When a Kanaka has endured an injury he hires a kahuna to pray his enemy to death. This imposes
on the victim the necessity of hiring a kahuna to pray down the other one, or of running away,
if he cannot afford the expense. The wizard calls on his intended victim and tells him what
is about to happen, and you would naturally suppose that the visitee would take the visitor
by the collar and the "bosom of his pants" and persuade him away from the premises, even if
he did not go out and exercise upon him in the yard. In fact, record has been made of explosive
exits of these wizards from Americans' houses when they made their usual courtesy call before
praying the resident out of existence, and 'tis said that they bore marks of Lynn-made shoe-soles
on their seats of honor for a week after.

But your Kanaka fears his medicine man and receives the news of doom politely. The kahuna tells
him that his conduct has displeased some god or goddess and that he must die. Every kahuna
claims what statesmen call a "pull" with his deities that enables him to have his prayers answered,
while opposition kahunas are snubbed. After a couple of days the kahuna drops around to see
how his victim is getting on, and generally he finds him in low spirits, with a meagre appetite,
because this process is as reliable as its opposite, which is called faith-cure. If a man can
sufficiently persuade himself that nothing ails him, he is almost sure to recover from an illness
that he hasn't got; and, by the same token, if he makes himself believe that he is going to
have indigestion, or a fall on the ice, or must die, he unnerves himself and makes it easy
for the expected to happen. If he runs away and hides, the kahuna's prayers do not work as
well, and if he has been to school and reads the papers, they do not work at all. Indeed, the
islanders have given up white people as tough subjects, so seasoned in whisky and a wrong religion
that curses are wasted on them as water is wasted on ducks and Kentucky colonels. The goddess
Pele has resigned the foreigner in discouragement.

Well, on this second visit the victim remembers all his misfortunes of the past two days, his
stomach ache, his thirst, his stubbed toe, his failure to collect eight cents that a neighbor
owes him, his nightmare after a supper of poi,--not mince-pie: just poi,--his discovery of
a bottle too late to know what was in it, and his wife's demand for a new dress. All these
miseries he ascribes to the left-handed prayers of which he is the subject, and he offers to
temporize. As in other parts of the world, silver is a strong dissuader. If he has hired a
kahuna himself to neutralize his enemy's bad prayers with good ones, the two voodoo workers
will retire and consult as to a settlement, each preserving a dignity and courtesy worthy of
his high profession, for, although the Roman soothsayers could not keep from snickering when
they met one another in the street, these kahunas really believe in themselves, for they have
prayed too many people out of the world not to do so.

If an apology and a couple of dollars fail to soften the enemy, or if the kahunas believe they
can raise the stake to three dollars by toiling a while longer, a prayer duel follows and the
best man wins. Kahuna number one delivers a veritable anathema, bestowing on his subject more
aches and illnesses and deformities and difficulties than Pius IX. conferred on Victor Emmanuel,
while number two sweats with the haste and force of his invocations for the continued or increased
health and fortune of his client. If he can afford them, the victim may hire two kahunas and
have them pray around the house until the opposition is silenced or the malevolent employer's
money gives out. When one of the two prays for his patron, in such a case the other may pray
against the enemy who began the trouble, so that, instead of doing a deadly injury, the instigator
of the disturbance may discover, to his alarm, that he is in more danger than his foe, and
some morning he may find himself dead.

King David Kalakaua made a law against praying folks into their graves, but the kahunas, to
a man, cried, "Why, this will kill business! If you don't abolish that law we will pray you
to death in two days." And King David took the law away, quick. In order to make a prayer for
death effectual the kahuna must possess himself of some object closely associated with the
person he intends to kill. Finger-nails, hair, and teeth are especially desired, but if they
cannot be had, a few drops of saliva will do. The kings were always so careful of their precious
selves that nail-parings and hair-croppings were burned to keep them from falling into the
hands of ghoulish kahunas, and they were always attended by a spittoon-bearer, who was a chief
of high rank, and whose duty it was to see that none of the royal spittle was accessible to
wizards or suspicious strangers. The spittoon was emptied into the sea at a distance from land
secretly and in the middle of the night. What a lecture Charles Dickens would have read to
the Americans out of this circumstance!

The last death attributed to the kahunas was that of Princess Kaiulani in the spring of 1899.
Though this young woman was enlightened, had travelled and studied in Europe and America, and
presumably disbelieved in the superstitions of her ancestors, it is whispered that the rumor
of kahuna influence against her shortened her days by many. The people believed so, at any
rate, though they were perplexed by the failure of the little red fish to run into the harbor
just before she breathed her last, as it was believed that they always made their appearance
prior to a death in the royal family. The rumbling and hissing and the sounding of a heavy
major chord in the depths of Kilauea that followed the funeral of Kaiulani were directly attributed
to her death.

The Cannibals

Despite the denials of Hawaiians that their ancestors ever ate the flesh of men, it is admitted
that a large company of cannibals, strong, dark, tattooed, and speaking a strange language,
were storm-blown to Kauai in the seventeenth century. It is guessed that they were Papuans.
The daughter of Kokoa, their chief, a beautiful girl of eighteen or so, with braided hair that
almost touched the ground, and strings of pearls at her neck and ankles, found an admirer and
a husband in an island chief who tried to instruct her in the taboo, for he had seen with horror
and apprehension that the new-comers allowed their women to eat bananas, cocoanuts, and certain
fish, and even to take them from the dishes used by the men. The bride promised to reform and
live on poi, but she had not been bred to this sort of victual, and had never been reproved
by the gods for eating other, so it was almost inevitable that she should backslide in her
virtuous intention, and when she so far defied public opinion, and thunders, and earthquakes
as to eat a banana in view of the priests, the public arose as one man and demanded punishment.
The chief begged that he might be allowed to send her back to her father, but the high priest
told him that the gods had been flouted beyond endurance, and would be satisfied only with
her death. The beautiful and hapless woman was therefore torn from the arms of her afflicted
husband, strangled, and thrown into the sea,--a warning to all the sex against forbidden fruit.

Then trouble began. Women's appetites might be restrained, but not those of men,--especially
the appetite for blood. Kokoa revenged himself for his daughter's murder by killing a relative
of her husband and serving him hot to an eager, because long abstemious, congregation. The
taste of Hawaiian chops and shoulders revived a greed for this sort of meat, and they preyed
openly on the populace of Kauai until those who remained arose as several men and drove them
out of the island. The cannibals fled in haste to Oahu, taking possession of the plateau of
Halemanu, which was high, reachable by only one or two paths, and those of steepness, difficulty,
and under constant guard, and here they established themselves as a sort of Doone band, literally
living upon the people in the country below. They had their temple,--oh, yes, indeed, they
could pray as long and as loud as any one,--and a creditable piece of masonry it was, with
its walls two hundred feet by sixty, and seven yards high. Near it was an oven where five human
bodies could be roasted at a time, and a carving stone six feet long, lightly hollowed, where
the hungry were served, Kokoa claiming the hearts and livers as a chief's right.

It did not take long for the Oahuans to become bashful about visiting the neighborhood of Halemanu,
and the man-eaters then took to eating one another. One big, savage fellow, named Lotu, began
to kill off his wife's relatives. This roused one of her brothers to revenge. He strengthened
himself in exercises of all kinds until his muscles were like steel, and encountered with Lotu
on the edge of the precipice near the principal path. They fought hand-to-hand until both were
covered with blood, then, finding that he was about to be forced over the brink, Lotu clasped
his brother-in-law and enemy about the neck and both went to their death together. The wife
and sister of the two combatants either fainted at the verge and fell or wilfully cast herself
from the same cliff. It is not recorded whether these victims of an unruly passion were interred
in earth or conveniently disposed of otherwise, but the affair created such a gloom in the
neighborhood that the cannibal colony moved away to parts unknown, to the vast relief of the
community in the more peaceful districts.

The Various Graves of Kaulii

When the Hawaiians were discovered by Captain Cook, in 1779, they had not been visited by white
men, so far as any native then living could remember. At all events, they had acquired only
a fair assortment of vices and not many diseases. Human sacrifice and the worship of phallic
emblems and effigies of their gods and dead kings were common. The king expected everybody
to fall prostrate before him when he appeared and pretend to go to sleep,--to be of as little
account as possible. And the people were pliant and willing under their restraints. They allowed
that the king was absolute master. Yet they were contented usually and not ill looking; lithe
and graceful, too, and gay, fond of sports and swimming, lovers of music, dancing, flowers,
and color, friendly in disposition, and good-natured. Except in shedding a few of their beliefs
with the taking on of more clothes, they have not changed greatly. As to cannibalism, white
men have become too numerous and too tough for eating, anyway, and they feel safe in any native
company of Pacific Islanders in these times.

Hawaiians claim that they never were cannibals, and that if they ate such of Captain Cook as
they did not return to his second in command it was because they were absent-minded or mistook
him for pork. They had ceased to believe him a god, for he had displayed infirmities of temper
and consideration that led to his death. A tradition of theirs may account for a once general
belief in their man-eating propensities. It dates back to the chieftaincy of Kaulii, in Oahu.
The people were careful in the sepulture of their chiefs, fearing that enemies might find the
remains and commit indignities on the senseless relics, or that the bones might be used for
spear-points and fish-hooks, such implements having magic power when they were whittled from
the shins of kings. To prevent such a possibility, so soon as the spirit tenant had gone the
wise men took charge of the body and prepared it for the grave. This they did by first cutting
off the flesh, which, being transitory and corruptible, they said was not worthy to be kept,
so was therefore burned; then cleaning the skeleton, soaking it in oil, and painting it red
with turmeric. This melancholy, if gaudy, object was tied in a parcel and buried in some cave
or cranny where no foeman would be likely to find it. Sometimes the bodies were sunk at sea,
with rocks tied at the feet, and the hearts of Hawaiian kings were often flung into the molten
lava of Kilauea.

Kaulii was chief in Oahu in the seventeenth century. Most of his ninety years he had faithfully
devoted to killing other chiefs and the people of other islands, wherefore he knew that many
would try to find his bones and break them. Just before his death he enjoined his councillors
to place his skeleton in some receptacle whence it could not easily be taken. After his death
his head councillor took it into the mountains and was gone for several days. When he returned
he sent an invitation to every one whom his messengers could reach to share in a feast in memory
of the dead chief. Free lunch was just as great an incentive in that century as it will be
in the next. They came, those faithful people, afoot and in boats, and camped in thousands
near the kitchen. After the games had been dutifully performed--for funerals were seasons of
cheer in those times--the dinner was served to the assembly. There were boiled dogs, roots,
fruits, fish, sour beer, and poi.

When the last calabash had been emptied and the company had taken a long breath, an elder in
the party asked the councillor if he had obeyed his master's command and buried the skeleton
where it would be safe from the vendetta that pursues an enemy to the grave. The councillor
made an embracing gesture above the multitude. "Here," he cried, "are the graves of Kaulii.
His bones can never be disturbed again."

The people looked about the grass and under their dishes, and, seeing nothing, asked to be
enlightened. Then the councillor explained that he had not only cleaned the bones of his dead
lord, but had dried and pounded them to a fine meal, had stirred them into the mass of poi
which these warriors and statesmen had enveloped, so that every man who had shared in that
feast was a grave. And they agreed that he was a faithful and sagacious servant, and passed
a resolution to keep his memory a bright green for several years after he was dead. They say
that was the only time they ate a man, and they did not know it then.

The Kingship of Umi

When King Liloa died he left his younger son, Hakau, to rule Hawaii in his place, but an older
and natural son, Umi, whose mother had been a farm-worker among the hills, he appointed as
guardian of the temples and their sacred statues. Umi had not learned of his royal parentage
until he had grown to be a fine stout fellow. He had lived a lonely though adventurous life,
and his kingly origin was shown in the fact that he could never be induced to work or do anything
useful, unless it might be hunting and fishing. Impulses were his guides. He was in nowise
disturbed when he learned that Liloa was his father. On the contrary, he took on a new dignity,
donned the feather cloak and helmet of a prince, walked, in a couple of days, to the king's
house, passed the guards without a word, carelessly striking down their threatening spears
with his own; then, gaining the king's presence unannounced, he plumped himself into the old
gentleman's lap. For one of low descent to venture on a liberty like this was death, and for
a moment Liloa was mightily offended. He sprang up, spilling the prince upon the earth; then,
recognizing on the young man's breast an ivory necklace clasp that had been his love-token
to the girl on the mountain farm years before, and admiring the courage of the youngster, he
kissed him and welcomed him to his family.

The old king died soon after, his skeleton being duly hidden in the sea, and Hakau, who from
the first had been jealous of his half-brother, now began a series of slights and rebukes which
hardly justified rebellion, yet were so irritating that after enduring them for a little, Umi
retired to the hills and resumed his old, lonely, wandering life. Not for long, however. Hakau
developed into a tyrant, narrow-minded, selfish, suspicious, cruel. One by one his followers
left him; treasons were rumored in his own household; his very priests connived against him.
At last, reports came to him of a resort to arms,--of a company advancing from the other side
of Hawaii, led by Umi and Maukaleoleo, the latter a giant eleven feet high, who wore a thicket
of hair that fell to his shoulders, bore a spear thirty feet long, and inspired terror by his
very aspect, albeit in times of peace he was one of the gentlest of men. When this giant was
a child the god Kanaloa had given him a golden fish, bidding him eat it and be strong. He had
done so, and on that very night began his wonderful growth, his strength so increasing that
presently he could hurl rocks no two other men could lift.

Troubled by reports of the uprising, the king consulted the oracles in a temple he had promised
to endow, but never had,--his principal gift (to be)--consisting of a figure of the war god
Akuapaao. This had long before been taken to Hawaii by a prophet whose canoe had been drawn
to its landing-place by the shark god and the god of the winds. In darkness he entered the
inner chamber of the temple. An unknown voice, speaking from the holy of holies, bade him send
his people to the woods next day for plumage of birds, with which to decorate the statue, when
he should get it, and thereby atone for the neglect and contempt of the gods that had done
so much to bring him into disfavor with the people.

Clever priests! They were already in league with Umi, and this was but a ruse to dissipate
the king's forces. The oracle was obeyed; the people were sent out to collect the feathers
of bright-hued birds, grumbling that they should be made to labor because of the laxity and
impiety of their ruler; and while they hunted, Umi, almost within hearing, was praying before
the very statue Hakau had sent his messengers to fetch. He had imposed a strict taboo on his
two thousand warriors for half a day, the taboo in this instance imposing silence, fasting,
and retirement, the forsaking of all industries, the extinction of all fires and lights, the
muzzling of pigs and dogs, and quieting of fowls by putting them under calabashes. As Umi advanced
toward the statue to decorate it with wreaths a beam of light fell through a rent in the temple
roof and crowned him and the god. It was a promise. Fires on the mountain tops that night assembled
all the insurgent forces, who were awaiting these signals, and a few hours later Umi sat on
the throne of his father, and the hated tyrant Hakau was offered to his neglected gods: a sacrifice.

Keaulumoku's Prophecy

Keaulumoku died in 1784. He was a poet, dreamer, prophet, and preserver of the legends of his
people. For more than three-score years he had roamed about Hawaii, esteemed for his virtues
and his wisdom by those who knew him, tolerated as harmless by those who did not. He wandered
about the vast and desolate lava fields and talked with spirits there. He learned rhythm and
music from the swing of the waves. The "little people" in the wood were his servants when he
needed help. In his closing years he occupied a cabin alone near Kauhola. Though not churlish,
he cared little for human society,--it seemed so small to him after daily contemplation of
the ocean and mountain majesties and the nightly vision of the stars; but he was alive to its
interests, and when the future opened to him he was always willing to read it for comfort or
warning.

It was reported in the villages at last that he would look on the faces of his people but once
more, and they were asked to assemble at his hut on the next evening, when he would chant his
last prophecy. Before sunset they gathered about his cabin a thousand or more, waiting quietly
or talking in whispers, and presently the mat which hung in the entrance was drawn aside, disclosing
the shrunken form and frosted hair of the venerable prophet. He began his chant in the quavering
voice of age, but as he sang he gained strength, and his tones were plainly heard by all in
the assemblage. He foretold the union of the islands under Kamehameha, the death of monarchy,
the ruin of the temples, the oncoming of the white race, the disappearance of the Hawaiian
people from the earth. Then blessing the company with uplifted hands, Keaulumoku sank back
lifeless. He was buried with solemn rites in a temple, and, under the inspiration of his prophecy,
Kamehameha began his work of conquest. In eleven years the islands were one nation. The rest
of the prophecy is coming true.

The Tragedy of Spouting Cave

Many caves pierce the igneous rock of the Hawaiian group, some with entrances below the ocean
level, and discovered only by accident. Famous among them is the spouting cave of Lanai. Old
myths make this a haunt of the lizard god, but the shark god, thinking this venture below the
water an intrusion on his territory, threatened to block the entrance with rocks, so the lizard
god swam over to Molokai and made his home in the cave near Kaulapana, where the people built
temples to him. An attempt of a daring explorer to light the cave of Lanai with fire hid in
a closed calabash was also resented, the vessel being dashed out of the hand of the adventurer
by some formless creature of the dark, who also plucked stones from the cave roof and hurled
at him until he retreated.

To this island, at the end of the eighteenth century, came King Kamehameha to rest after his
war and enjoy the fish dinners for which the island was famous. One of his captains was Kaili,
a courageous and susceptible Hawaiian, who celebrated the outing by falling head-over-heels
in love. Kaala, "the perfumed flower of Lanai," returned his vows, and would have taken him
for a husband, without ceremony or delay, save for the stern parent, who is a frequent figure
in such romances. This parent, Oponui, had a reason for his hate of Kaili, the two having encountered
in the last great battle. Kaili had probably forgotten his opponent, but Oponui bitterly remembered
him, for his best friend had been struck down by the spear of the young captain. Another cause
for opposing this marriage was that Kaala had been bespoken by a great, hairy, tattooed savage
known as "the bone-breaker." It occurred to Oponui that a good way to be rid of the cavalier
would be to let him settle his claim with the famous wrestler. He chuckled as he thought of
the outcome, for the bone-breaker had never been beaten. The challenge having been made and
accepted, the king and his staff agreed to watch the contest. It was brief, brutal, and decisive.
Though the big wrestler had the more strength, Kaili had the more skill and quickness. He dodged
every rush of his burly opponent, tripped him, broke both his arms by jumping on them when
he was down, and when the disabled but vengeful fighter, with dangling hands, made a bull-like
charge with lowered head, the captain sprang aside, caught him by the hair, strained him suddenly
backward across his knee, and flung him to the earth, dying with a broken spine. Kaili had
won his bride.

The girl's father was not at the end of his resources, however. He appeared in a day or two
panting, as with a long run, and begged Kaala to fly at once to her mother in the valley, as
she was mortally ill and wished to see her daughter before she died. The girl kissed her lover,
promising to return soon, and was hurried away by Oponui toward the Spouting Cave. Arrived
there, she looked up and down the shore, but saw none other than her father, who was smiling
into her face with a look of craft and cruelty that turned her sick at heart. In a broken voice
she asked his purpose. Was her mother dead? Had he killed her? Oponui seized her arms with
the gripe of a giant. "The man you love is my foe," he shouted. "I shall kill him, if I can.
If not, he shall never see you again. When he has left Lanai, either for Hawaii or for the
land of souls, I will bring you back to the sun. Come!"

Now, the water pushing through the entrance to this cavern becomes a whirlpool; then, as it
belches forth in a refluent wave, it is hurled into a white column. Watching until the water
began to whirl and suck, Oponui sprang from the rocks, dragging his daughter with him. She
struggled for a moment, believing that his intention was to drown her. There was a rush and
a roar; then, buffeted, breathless, she arose on the tide, and in a few seconds felt a beach
beneath her feet. Oponui dragged her out of reach of the wave, and as soon as her eyes grew
accustomed to the dimness she found herself to be in a large, chill cavern. Crabs were clattering
over the stones, and rays and eels could be seen writhing shadowy, in pools. The brawling of
the ocean came smothered, faint, but portentous, and in the green light that mounted through
the submerged door the grotto seemed a place of dreams,--a dank nightmare.

"Here you stay until I come," commanded Oponui. "Make no attempt to escape, for so surely as
you do, you will be cut to pieces on the rocks, and the sharks await outside." Then, diving
into the receding water, he disappeared, and she was left alone.

Kaili awaited with impatience the return of his betrothed. He chided himself that he had allowed
her father to persuade him against following her to the cabin of her mother. Then doubt began
to perplex him; then suspicion. A bird croaked significantly as it flew above his head. He
could not longer endure inaction. Kaala's footprints were still traceable in the sand. He would
go as far as they might lead. He set off at a round pace, stopping now and then to assure himself,
and presently stood perplexed near the Spouting Cave, for there they ceased. As he was looking
about for some clew that might set him right once more, a faint movement behind him caused
him to turn, and he saw a figure slinking along from rock to rock, bending low, as if seeking
to be concealed: Oponui! Why should he be alone? Why should he hide like that? Why was he trying
to escape? The truth flashed upon him. He remembered the man's face in battle, remembered their
vain though savage interchange of spears. Oponui had taken Kaala from him. Had he killed her?
He sprang toward the creeping figure with a shout, "Where is my wife?"

There was a short struggle; then Oponui, wriggling from his grasp, set off at a surprising
pace toward a temple of refuge, with Kaili close at his heels. The chase was vain. Oponui reached
the gate, rushed through, and fell on the earth exhausted. Two priests ran forward and offered
their taboo staffs against the entrance of his pursuer. The gods could not be braved by breaking
the taboo. With a taunt and a curse at his enemy, the captain returned to the shore where the
footprints had disappeared. His heart-beats stifled him. His head was whirling. As he stood
looking down into the boiling waters it seemed to his wandering fancy as if the girl had risen
toward him in the spout from the cave. Hardly knowing what he did, he spoke her name and leaped
from the rock to clasp her pale form. He was drawn under, and in a few seconds was flung violently
upon the beach in the cave.

Kaili's leap had been seen by his king, who, with a guide, had gone to seek him, and on learning
of this grotto the king and the guide plunged after. They found the lover seated on the pebbles
in the green twilight, with Kaala's head upon his lap, his arms about her. She was dying, but
a smile of content was on her face. He tried to restore her, to rouse her to an effort to live.
It was of no avail. With a whispered word of love she closed her eyes and ceased to breathe.

King Kamehameha advanced, his rude face softened with pity. "Come, Kaili," he said. "The poor
child was happy in her last hour. This cave is her proper burial-place."

"I cannot leave her, O king, for without her I cannot live." Before his purpose could be divined,
Kaili had seized a rock and brought it down on his own head with crushing force. He swayed
for a moment and fell dead beside the body of his bride. The king had the corpses wrapped in
cloth, but left them there, and the few who have ventured through the whirlpool have seen in
the cave the skeletons of the lovers.

The lament of Ua has been preserved. She was a girl whose secret love for the captain had impelled
her to follow him, and who had seen his plunge into the leaping water. It runs in this fashion:

    "Dead is Kaili, the young chief of Hawaii,
    The chief of few years and many battles.
    His limbs were strong and his heart was gentle.
    His face was like the sun. He was without fear.
    Dead is the slayer of the Bone-Breaker;
    Dead the chief who crushed the bones of Mailou;
    Dead the lover of Kaala and the loved of Ua.
    For his love he plunged into the deep water.
    For his love he gave his life. Who is like Kaili?
    Kaala is hid and I am lonely.
    Kaili is dead, and the black cloth is over my heart.
    Now let the gods take the life of Ua!"

The Grave of Pupehe

Just off the southwest shore of Lanai is a block of lava eighty or ninety feet high, vertical
or overhanging on every side, absolutely without foothold. Yet at its top one may see from
the neighboring shore a grave with a low wall built about it. This is the resting-place of
Pupehe, the wife of one to whom was given the name of Misty Eyes, because the woman's eyes
so dazzled his own. These two loved so well that they were all in all to one another. They
chose to live apart from their people, roaming the woods, climbing the hills, surf-riding,
fishing, berrying as the whim took them.

Lest some chief should look on her face and envy him, Misty Eyes hid his companion in a little
hut among the trees, as secret and secure as a bird's nest, and sometimes they would go together
to a cave, opening from the sea, opposite Pupehe's Rock, to catch and cook a sea-turtle.

The season of storms was at hand, but as the day had broken fair, Pupehe went to the cave to
prepare a meal, while her husband took the calabashes to fill at a spring up the valley. A
mist had come up from nowhere when he turned to go back; the wind was rising to a gale, the
sea was whitening. His heart went into his throat, for he recalled how the breakers thundered
in at the cave and swept the strip of beach inside. Flinging down the calabashes, he ran with
all his speed. Immense waves were sweeping the cavern from end to end. Their thunder deafened
him. Out of an acre of seething white a brown arm lifted. He leaped in, seized Pupehe, and
succeeded in gaining the shore, but to no avail. She was dead. After the storm had passed he
paddled to the lonely rock; was raised, with his burden, by a pitying god, and on the summit,
where none might stand even beside the grave of her whom in life he had guarded so jealously,
he buried the cold form. When the last stone had been placed on the wall, Misty Eyes sang a
dirge for his wife and leaped into the sea.

The Lady of the Twilight

In Koolauloa, Oahu, is a natural well, of unknown depth and thirty yards in diameter, that
is believed to be connected with the ocean. Bodies drowned in this crater are said to have
been found afterward floating in the sea. This pond, known as Waiapuka, hides the entrance
to a cave that can be reached only by diving, and in that cave was concealed during her infancy
Laieikawai, Lady of the Twilight. Her father, enraged that his wife always presented female
children to him, swore he would kill all such offspring until a male issue should appear, and
Laieikawai was therefore kept out of his sight and in retirement until she had grown to womanhood.
Her beauty attracted even the gods, and chiefs from many islands travelled far to see her face
when she had been taken from the cavern by her grandmother and bestowed more fittingly in a
house thatched with parrot feathers and guarded by the lizard god. Her bed was bird-wings,
the birds were her companions, she wore a robe tinted like a rainbow, and wherever she went
a fragment of rainbow hung over her and might be seen afar.

Laieikawai married a sun prince, and the same rainbow served as a ladder to take her to his
new home in the moon, his place in the sun being too hot and glaring for endurance. This was
a fickle prince, for having seen another pretty face on earth, he descended, and it was a year
ere he appeared in the moon again. The young wife meanwhile had gone to the bowl of knowledge,
a wooden vessel enclosed in wicker, decorated with feathers and with birds carved in wood along
the rim. Looking in and uttering the command, "Laukapalili!" a vision of her recreant husband
appeared. The father and mother of the prince were joint witnesses with the wife of his faithlessness.
As the picture vanished the air grew dark; faint, grisly shapes arose, and wailing voices sounded,
"Heaven has fallen!" Standing on the rainbow bridge, the father, mother, and wife cast off
their love for the prince, and condemned him to be a wandering ghost, living on butterflies.
Then, having tired of heaven, the Lady of the Twilight returned to earth.

The Ladrones

The taking of Guam during the war with Spain was one of the comedies of that disagreement.
When its rickety fort was fired upon by one of our ships, the Spanish governor hastened down
to the shore to greet the American officers, and apologized because he was out of powder and
could not reply to what he supposed was a salute. Off in that corner of the world he had not
heard of any war.

With the cession of this largest of the Ladrone islands we fall heir to some race problems
as baffling as those presented by our Indians. The natives of this group belong to the Tarapons,
and the traditions of these people say that they came in part from the east and partly from
the west. It has been thought that they have a slight mixture of Mongolian blood, and this
is not unlikely, for Chinese and Japanese junks have at various times been blown over sea to
farther shores than these. History for this group begins with Magellan, who named it for the
ladrones or thieves, who annexed his belongings when he arrived on the first voyage that had
ever been made around the world. That they had crafts and arts is proved by their weapons,
canoes, cloth, and armor, and they have left here some remarkable stone columns, more than
twice the height of a man, with hemispheres of rock on their tops, flat sides uppermost, and
six feet wide. In Tinian, Kusaie, and also in Ponape, in the Carolines, there are ruins, including,
in the latter island, a court three hundred feet long with walls ten yards high, some of the
monoliths being twenty-five feet long and eight feet thick. On Tongataboo are larger rocks,
forty feet high, which were quarried elsewhere and shipped to that coral island. On Easter
Island are platforms a hundred yards long, ten wide and ten high, with great statues all cut
from stone. None of these remains, nor the picture-writing found near the statues, throw light
on the history, purpose, or personality of their builders. Every family has its little circle
of shells and stones which is a shrine where the gods are worshipped, and most of the gods
are spirits of the great and wise who died long ago. Offerings to these took the form of food
and of anointing for their altars, but human sacrifices were no doubt demanded at times, when
the priests had been specially venturesome in asking favors. When a man died his soul sprang
out, went below the earth, and found felicity in the west. This belief resembles the Indian
faith in the happy hunting-ground, and incidentally it points the course of empire. The spirit
could return once in a while, and ghostly visitations were sorely dreaded. The institution
of the taboo was and is connected with the native religions of the Pacific islands. We have
adopted the word and use it in its true meaning of forbidden. If an article were dedicated
to a god, or used in his worship, or had been touched by him, or claimed by a chief or a priest,
no commoner dared lay finger on it, for it was as sacred as the ark of the covenant. Some canny
planters kept boys out of their orchards and palm groves by offering the fruit to certain gods
until it was ripe, for a sign of taboo kept out all marauders till the crop was ready for gathering,
when the owner changed his mind and claimed it himself. To break a taboo was not only to incur
the wrath of the priests, but of the gods to whom the gift was offered, and who would surely
reward the blasphemer for his sin by illness, accident, loss, or death.

As soon as the Spaniards had occupied the Ladrones--afterward named the Marianas, in honor
of Maria Anna, queen of Philip IV. of Spain--they proceeded to slaughter the natives. In seventy
years they had slain with sword, rack, toil, grief, and new diseases about fifty thousand people,
reducing the populace to eighteen hundred. Of this aboriginal race, the Chamorros, nearly all
have perished. In their original estate these were the most advanced of the Pacific islanders;
they had more arts, more refinement, more kindliness, and more morality than the others. Under
an age of oppression and abuse they naturally deteriorated, and have cared little to advantage
themselves by the few schools and chapels that the Spaniards established in Guam and thereabout.
It may be that the Chamorros shared with the people of the Carolines in the suffering caused
by the great irruption of savages from the south under Icho-Kalakal. These warriors, in their
wooden navies, destroyed the great tombs and temples because they had been raised to other
gods than their own, slew the defenders of the temples, and broke up the old civilization,
passing from island to island, and continuing their waste and murder. It was a raid of Goths
and Vandals, and the effect of it was lasting. In Ponape it is said that the great structures
they overthrew are haunted, and people thereabout will not eat a certain fresh-water fish of
a blue color, because the king, Chauteleur, flying before Icho-Kalakal, fell into Chapalap
River and was changed by the gods into one of these fish.

Old Beliefs of the Filipinos

Respecting their myths the Filipinos differ in little from other human families whose civilization
is incomplete. They had in former times the same tendency to create gods and spirits for particular
hills, woods, seas, and lakes, to endow the brutes with human qualities, to symbolize in the
deeds of men and animals the phenomena of the heavens. Even now the Monteses tell of a tree
that folds its limbs around the trunk of another and hugs it to death, the tree thus killed
rotting and leaving a tube of tightly laced branches in which are creatures that bleed through
the bark at a sword-thrust or an ax-cut. These creatures are mischievously alleged to be Spaniards.
The Tagalogs believe in Tic-Balan, an evil spirit who inhabits fig-trees, but is kept off by
wearing a certain herb, and in a female spirit of the woods, Azuan, who is kept away from the
house in times of domestic anxiety by the husband, who mounts to the roof and keeps up a disturbance
for some hours.

In their feasts and ceremonies the natives have hymns and prayers to the rain-spirit, the sea,
the star-god, the good birds, and the winds. Little has been done toward the preservation of
their myths, for the Spaniards, during their centuries of control, suppressed learning, except
as it pertained to religious studies, and tolerated but scant liberty of opinion. The friars,
against whom the people nursed so strong a hate, stood for all that was harsh, narrow, tyrannical,
and unprogressive. In order to gain money and maintain their political ascendency they engaged
in commerce, became owners of real estate and buildings, including saloons and dance-houses,
debased their churchly functions, discouraged attempts at progress, practically forbade the
printing of secular books and papers, making illiteracy, with its attendant vice, poverty,
and superstition, universal; and when Dr. Jose Rizal urged his reforms in the church and civil
service, he was shot, though not as a blasphemer, but because his secret order, the Katipunan,
with its Masonic ritual and blood initiation, was thought to be dangerous to the public peace.

The change from this mediæval condition to that of the nineteenth century, with its impatience
of title, caste, form, and ceremony, its trust in equal right, its insistence on freedom of
belief, came suddenly. In shaking off their ancient political and religious bonds the Filipinos
may lose some of the quaint and poetic records of their ancient faiths; for the first progress
of a nation after a long sleep is a material one, and art, literature, all the more delicate
expressions of national taste, history, and tendency, have to bide their day until the fortunes
of the nation are assured. In this period of reconstruction let us hope that those fables and
dreams will not be forgotten which tell, more truly than dates and names and records, the ancient
state of the people, and afford us a means of estimating the impetus and direction of their
advance.

The influence of Christian teaching is plain in some of the songs, plays, and stories of the
natives, especially in the plays, for in them the hero is often a Christian prince who defeats
a strong and wicked Mohammedan ruler, and releases an injured maiden. Change the names and
the play becomes a modern English melodrama. In several of the islands, however, the impress
of Spanish occupancy is slight, and customs are still in force that have existed for hundreds
of years. On Mindanao are still to be found the politic devil-worshippers, who, instead of
seeking to ingratiate themselves with benevolent deities, whose favor is already assured, try
to gain the goodwill of the fiends. Their rites are practised in caves in which will be found
ugly figures of wood and an altar on which animals are sacrificed. The flesh of these animals
is eaten by the devils, according to the priests, and by the priests, according to the white
men. The evil spirits who appear in the half-darkness of these caves, leaping and screaming,
goading the company to frenzy, are priests in disguise and in demoniac possession.

Tagbanuas tear a house down when a death occurs in it, bury the corpse in the woods, and mark
the grave by dishes and pots used by the deceased in life. These implements are broken. Among
our American Indians the outfits supplied to a dead man are in sound condition, as it is supposed
he will need them on his journey to the happy hunting-grounds, while the Chinese put rice and
chicken in sound vessels on the graves of their brethren, believing they will need refreshment
when they start on the long journey to the land of the shades. Tramps know where the Chinese
are accustomed to bury their dead in American cities. When food is placed before an Otaheite
corpse it is not for the dead, but for the gods, and is intended to secure their good offices
for the departed. While a Tagbanua corpse is above ground it is liable to be eaten by a vampire
called the balbal that lives on Mindanao, has the form of a man with wings and great claws,
tears open the thatch of houses and consumes bodies by means of a long tongue, which it thrusts
through the opening in the roof. These Tagbanuas do not believe in a heaven in the skies, because,
they say, you could not get up there. When a man dies he enters a cave that leads into the
depths of the earth, and after travelling for a long time he arrives in the chamber where Taliakood
sits,--a giant who employs his leisure in stirring a fire that licks two tree trunks without
destroying them. The giant asks the new-comer if he has been good or bad in the world overhead,
but the dead man makes no reply. He has a witness who has lived with him and knows his actions,
and it is the function and duty of this witness to state the case. This little creature is
a louse. On being asked what would happen if a native were to die without one of these attendants,
the people protest that no such thing ever happens. So the louse, having neither to gain nor
lose, reports the conduct of his commissary and associate, and if the man has been bad, Taliakood
throws him into the fire, where he is burned to ashes, and so an end of him. If he has been
good, the giant speeds him on his way to a happy hunting-ground, where he can kill animals
by thousands, and where the earth also yields fruits and vegetables in plenty. Here he finds
a house, without having the trouble to build one, and a wife is also provided for him,--the
deceased wife of some neighbor usually, although he can have his own wife if she is considerate
enough to die when he does. Down here everybody is well off, though the rich, having had much
pleasure in the world, have less of it than the poor. After a term of years the Tagbanua dies
again and goes at once to a heaven in a deeper cave without danger from fire. Seven times he
dies, each time going deeper and becoming happier, and probably gains Nirvana in the end. Occasionally
a good spirit returns as a dove, and a bad one comes as a goat; indeed, a few of the bad ones
are doomed to wander over the earth forever.

A common belief is that the soul is absent from the body in sleep, and if death occurs then
the soul is lost. "May you die sleeping" is one of the most dreadful of curses.

Among the Mangyan mountaineers it is customary to desert a person who is about to die. They
return after his death, carry the corpse to the forest, build a fence about it, and roof it
with a thatch. These people seem to have no word for god, spirit, or future life; they do not
worship either visible or unseen things, and are the most moral of the Filipinos. The lowlanders
also desert their dying, and after death close all paths to the house, leave the skeleton of
the defunct to be picked clean by ants, and change their names for luck.

When an islander in the Calamianes province dies his friends ask the corpse where it would
like to be buried, naming several places, and lifting the body after each question. When the
body seems to rise lightly the dead man has said, "Yes." It may then be buried, or placed in
a tree in the desired locality, with such of its belongings as the family can spare, and the
mourners watch around a fire that night until all the logs are consumed. The dead man walks
about in the ashes, leaving his footprints, and sometimes shows himself to his relatives. Singing
and feasting follow for several nights, and the house of the dead is then abandoned.

The holes in the marble cliffs of San Francisco Strait formerly contained the coffined dead
of the tattooed Pintados, who sacrificed slaves at the funeral that they might attend their
relatives in the next world. Fear of the spirits of these rocks was but partially overcome
when a Spanish priest smashed the coffins and tumbled the bodies into the sea, for the strait
is still haunted and the burial rocks are good places to keep away from after dark.

Among the Moslem Moros it is a sure passport to heaven to kill a Christian, and when one remembers
how the people have been robbed, tortured, and oppressed by nominal Christians, this item of
faith is not surprising. The more Christians he kills the greater will be his reward. He bathes
in a sacred spring, shaves his eye-brows, dresses in white, takes an oath before a pandita
or native priest to die killing infidels; then, with the ugly creese, or wave-edged knife,
he runs madly through the street, killing, right and left, until some considerate person shoots
him. In the rage for blood he has been known to push himself farther against a sword or bayonet
that had already entered his vitals in order to stab the man who had stopped him. When they
hear of his death the relatives of the fanatic have a celebration, and declare that in the
fall of the night they see him ride by on a white horse, bound for the home of the good, where
no Christians ever go to vex the angels. These people are often fatalists. They will drink
water known to be poisoned with typhoid germs, and when epidemics come they declare them to
be the will of God, and refuse to take the slightest measure against infection. They believe
that when a strange black dog runs by cholera follows on his heels.

Yet, like our Indians, the better Tagbanuas and Calamianes try to heal the sick through the
aid of drugs and charms and incantations, and they have their medicine man or papalyan. There
is in the forest a strange little fellow, known as the man of the wood, who has the power of
giving to these doctors the art of healing. He rushes out upon one who walks alone, seeking
power, and brandishes a spear, finally aiming it at the breast of the candidate, and advancing
his foot as if to throw it. If the candidate runs he is unworthy, but if he stands his ground
the little man of the wood drops his spear and gives a pearl to him. This pearl is never shown
to anybody. It is looked at secretly at a patient's bedside, and if clear the physician will
prescribe, but if it is dark, or has taken on a stony aspect, he resigns the case. The "drugs"
are similar to those used by the Chinese, consisting in part of powdered teeth and bones and
other animal preparations. Charms are in common use as a protection not only from disease but
from murder and misfortune, and in the fighting between the Americans and the natives about
Manila many poor, half-naked creatures, armed with bows and arrows, had ventured fearlessly
into the zone of fire, believing themselves to be safe because they wore an anting-anting at
the neck. This object, like an Indian's "good medicine," is anything,--a little book, a bright
pebble, a church relic, a medal, an old bullet, a coin, a piece of cloth, a pack of cards.
It is the faith that goes with it, not the object itself, that counts. Even Aguinaldo has been
invested by his followers with superhuman power. Just before he resorted to arms against the
Americans the natives knew that the time for rebellion had come, for a woman in Biacnabato
gave birth to a child dressed in a general's uniform, and above Tondo a woman's figure crowned
with snakes was painted in fire upon the night-sky.

In details of their faiths the tribes differ, but there is a prevalent belief in a principle
of good that the Moros call Tuhan. The sun, moon, and stars are the light that shines from
him,--he is everywhere, all-seeing, all-powerful; he has given fleeting souls to brutes and
eternal souls to men. The soul enters a child's body at birth, through the soft space in the
top of the head, and leaves through the skull at death. Their first men were giants, and Eve
was fifty feet high, but as men's minds grew their bodies became of less account, and they
will shrink and shrink until, at the world's end, they will be only three feet high, but will
consist mostly of brains. Comparing a brawny savage with an anæmic scholar, one fancies there
is reason in this forecast. The Tagbanuas have no Adam and Eve. Those of them who live beside
the ocean say they are the children of Bulalacao, a falling star that descended to the shore
and became a beautiful woman. The gods of these people are like men, but are stronger, living
in caves, eating an ambrosia-like boiled rice that has the power of moving. Their gods sometimes
steal their children.

Old Testament traditions are commonly accepted by the Moros, who believe in No (Noah), Adam,
Mosa (Moses), Ibrahim (Abraham), Sulaiman (Solomon), Daud (David), and Yakub (Jacob); but creation
myths are locally modified, and some tales of recent emergence of islands out of the sea are
probably true. In all volcanic districts mountains may be shaken down and hills cast up in
a day. Siquijor formerly bore the name of the Isle of Fire, for the natives say that in the
days of their grandfathers a cloud brooded on the sea for a week, uttering thunders and hisses
and flashing forth bolts of fire. When the cloud lifted, Siquijor stood there. The geology
of the island supports the tradition.

The future is differently conceived by different sects and families, some panditas teaching
that the soul, having come from God, will return to him at death; others that it will sleep
in the earth or the air until the world has ended, when all will be swept on a wind to a mount
of judgment, where saints and angels will weigh them, and souls heavy with sin will fall into
hell; others that there is no hell of fire, because there is not coal enough to keep it going,
but that every man is punished until his soul is purified, when it rises to heaven, glowing
with light and color; others that men are punished according to their sins; liars and gossips
with sore mouths and tired jaws; gluttons with lame stomachs; jealous, cruel, tricky people
with aching hearts; abusive and thievish ones with pains in their hands; others that one finds
hell enough on earth in fear, illness, disappointment, misunderstanding and Spaniards, to atone
for all the mischief he is liable to make.

Animal Myths

In the fables of the Filipinos the animals often speak together in a common language. The dove,
however, is the only one that comprehends human speech, and it is a creature of uncommon shrewdness
and intelligence, like the hare in the Indian myths and Br'er Rabbit in the stories of our
Southern negroes. Once the dove was a child. In shame and anger that its mother should refuse
to give it some rice she was pounding for panapig (a sort of cake), it ran out of the cabin,
took two leaves of a nipa, shaped wings from them, which it fastened to its shoulders, and
fluttered into the boughs of a neighboring tree, changing, in its flight, from a child to a
dove. It still calls for panapig.

Darwin is read backward by the natives, for they say that the monkey was a man, long, long
ago, and might have been one still but for his mañana habit, so general in the Spanish colonies.
He had a partner whom he greatly vexed by his idleness, and once, when this partner was planting
rice, he glanced up and saw the monkey squatted on the earth, with his face between his hands,
watching the labors of the industrious member of the firm,--for nothing makes loafing sweeter
than to see somebody else work. Enraged, the busy one caught up a cudgel and flung it at the
monkey, who was thereupon seized with a sudden but futile activity, and started to run away.
The club struck him in the rear so mightily that it entered his spinal column and stayed there,
becoming his tail.

In the Moro tradition of the flood--a tradition almost world-wide--Noah and his family got
into a box when the forty days of rain began, and one pair of each kind of bird and beast followed
them. All of the human race except Noah, his wife and children, were either drowned or changed.
Those men who ran to the mountains when they saw the flood rising became monkeys; those who
flung themselves into the sea became fish; the Chinese turned into hornbills; a woman who was
eating seaweed and kept on eating after the waves broke over her became a dugong.

In Mindanao, Basilan, and Sulu the pig is held in suspicion and its flesh is not eaten. The
reason for this aversion is that the first pigs were grandchildren of the great Mahomet himself,
and their conversion to these lowly quadrupeds fell out in this way: When Jesus (Isa) called
on Mahomet, the latter, jealous of his reputed power, bade him guess what was in the next room.
Christ said that he did not wish to do so. Mahomet then commanded him to prove his ability
to see through walls, and added that if he made a mistake he would kill him. Thereupon Christ
answered, "There are two animals in that chamber that are like no other in the world."

"Wrong!" cried the Prophet, plucking out his sword. "They are my grandchildren. You have spoken
false, and you must lose your head."

"Look and see," insisted Christ, and Mahomet flung open the chamber door, whereupon two hogs
rushed out. It should be added that while the divinity of Christ is denied in some of the Oriental
religions, he figures in many of them as a great and good man, gifted with supernatural power. His
sons by his second wife were Anthony (1558-1601), a diplomatist of some repute, and the illustrious
Francis Bacon (q.v.).

See G. Whetstone, "Remembraunce of the life of Sir N. Bacon," in the Frondes Caducae (London,
1816); J. A. Froude, History of England, passim (London, 1881 f.).

BACON, ROGER (c. 1214-c. 1294), English philosopher and man of science, was born near Ilchester
in Somerset. His family appears to have been in good circumstances, but in the stormy reign
of Henry III. their property was despoiled and several members of the family were driven into
exile. Roger completed his studies at Oxford, though not, as current
traditions assert, at Merton or at Brasenose, neither of which had
then been founded.

His abilities were speedily recognized by his contemporaries, and he enjoyed the friendship of such
eminent men as Adam de Marisco and Robert Grosseteste, bishop of Lincoln.

Very little is known of Bacon's life at Oxford; it is said he took
orders in 1233, and this is not improbable.

In the following year, or perhaps later, he crossed over to France and studied at the university
of Paris, then the centre of intellectual life in Europe. The two great orders, Franciscans and
Dominicans, were in the vigour of youth, and had already begun to take the lead in theological discussion.
Alexander of Hales was the oracle of the Franciscans, while the rival order rejoiced in Albertus
Magnus and Thomas Aquinas.

The scientific training which Bacon had received, mainly from the study of the Arab writers, showed
him the manifold defects in the systems reared by these doctors. Aristotle was known but in
part, and that part was rendered well-nigh unintelligible through the vileness of the translations;
yet not one of those professors would learn Greek. The Scriptures read, if at all, in the erroneous
versions were being deserted for the Sentences of Peter Lombard. Physical science, if there
was anything deserving that name, was cultivated, not by experiment in the Aristotelian way, but
by arguments deduced from premises resting on authority or custom.

Everywhere there was a show of knowledge concealing fundamental ignorance. Bacon, accordingly,
withdrew from the scholastic routine and devoted himself to languages and experimental research.
The only teacher whom he respected was a certain Petrus de Maharncuria Picardus, or of Picardy,
probably identical with a certain mathematician, Petrus Peregrinus of Picardy, who is perhaps
the author of a MS. treatise, De Magnete, contained in the Bibliothèque Impériale at Paris. The
contrast between the obscurity of such a man and [v.03 p.0154] the fame enjoyed by the fluent young
doctors roused Bacon's indignation. In the Opus Minus and Opus Tertium he pours forth a violent
tirade against Alexander of Hales, and another professor, not mentioned by name, but spoken
of as alive, and blamed even more severely than Alexander. This anonymous writer,[1] he says, acquired
his learning by teaching others, and adopted a dogmatic tone, which
has caused him to be received at Paris with applause as the equal
of Aristotle, Avicenna, or Averroes.

Bacon, during his stay in Paris, acquired considerable renown. He took the degree of doctor of
theology, and seems to have received the complimentary title of doctor mirabilis. In 1250 he was
again at Oxford, and probably about this time entered the Franciscan order. His fame spread
at Oxford, though it was mingled with suspicions of his dealings in the black arts and with some
doubts of his orthodoxy. About 1257, Bonaventura, general of the order, interdicted his lectures
at Oxford, and commanded him to place himself under the superintendence of the body at Paris. Here
for ten years he remained under supervision, suffering great privations and strictly prohibited
from writing anything for publication. But his fame had reached the ears of the papal legate in
England, Guy de Foulques, who in 1265 became pope as Clement IV. In the following year he wrote
to Bacon, ordering him notwithstanding any injunctions from his superiors, to write out and
send to him a treatise on the sciences which he had already asked of him when papal legate. Bacon,
whose previous writings had been mostly scattered tracts, capitula
quaedam, took fresh courage from this command of the pope. He set
at naught the jealousy of his superiors and brother friars, and despite
the want of funds, instruments, materials for copying and skilled
copyists, completed in about eighteen months three large treatises,
the Opus Majus, Opus Minus and Opus Tertium, which, with some other
tracts, were despatched to the pope. Matter-of-fact
historians allow that the figure of the child may have been left there by Magellan. It worked
miracles of a surprising character for years after his death, and the first settlement in Cebu
was called The City of the Most Holy Name of Jesus in its honor. The customary discrepancies
between the piety and the practice of the conquerors existed in the Philippines, as in the
Antilles. They slew the natives until the survivors threw up their hands and professed the
right religion; then they shot twenty-four thousand Chinese who had settled in and about Cebu,
thus reducing themselves to a wretched state, for these Spaniards had depended on the Chinese
as their servants, cooks, farmers, laborers, shoemakers, and tailors. It is worthy of note
that other missionaries had shown activity, but with less result, for their methods had been
more conciliatory. The Mahometanism that had been introduced by Moslem preachers from Arabia
got no farther than Sulu, and the Confucianism imported by Chinamen seems to have obtained
no permanent hold. Through all changes the Holy Child remained uninjured, and he continues
his good work to this day.

When the Sulu pirates had fallen upon a year of such bad business that they reaped a profit
of barely fifty per cent, on their investment in ships and weapons, there was great discontent
among them. Prizes were few and defeats occasional. Looking back on their highest hill, as
they sailed away, and fearing that when they returned it might be with but half a cargo of
gold and rum and Christians, so many of them wept for the misery of this thought that to this
day the height is known as Buat Timantangis, or Mount of Tears. In one dull season, when the
pirates were almost mutinous because of their continued ill-fortune, it occurred to one of
the captains that an image to which the Christians prayed so earnestly and with such good effect
might do as much for him as for some other natives. In his barbarian mind there was no absurdity
in trying to persuade a gentle Virgin or a pure-minded Saint to deliver into his hands the
goods and persons of those who knelt before their effigies. A sacred image was "good medicine"
for Spaniards and Tagalogs, and should, therefore, be good medicine for Mahometans. Thus, he
bethought him of the statue now known as the Virgin of Antipolo, that came from Spain by way
of Mexico in charge of early missionaries. To think was to act. He raided the village where
it had been enshrined and attempted to carry it off; but the statue had warned the faithful
of its peril, and the marauders were met and driven off by a powerful force. The Virgin of
Antipolo became one of the most influential of all the guardians of the islands, and to this
day is especially besought by mothers who ask for her intercession on behalf of their sickly
children. Holy water taken from her shrine will cure the sufferer, and the mother then performs
a public penance in thankfulness. Before the American arrival, with its sudden imposition of
new ideas on an old society, it was no uncommon thing to see on Good Friday a company of the
richest women in Manila, poorly attired and with bare feet, dragging through the streets a
heavy cross thirty feet in length. This was in fulfilment of vows they had made at the shrine
of Antipolo.

This Virgin of Antipolo is likewise known as Our Lady of Good Voyage and Peace. She arrived
from Mexico in a state galleon in 1626. On the voyage she calmed a storm so quickly that the
priests proclaimed her special sanctity, and ordered her to be received in Manila with salutes
of bells and guns. While the Jesuits were building a church for her she would often descend
from her temporary altar and stand in an antipolo tree (Astocarpus incisa). People cut pieces
from this tree for charms against disease and misfortune, until Father Salazar ordered that
the trunk should be its pedestal. In an early rebellion the Chinese insurgents threw the statue
into the fire. Flames were all about it, yet not a hair, not a thread of lace was singed, and
the body of brass was unmarked by smoke. Angered at this defiance of their power, a Chinaman
stabbed it in the face, and, curiously, the wound remains to this day in protest against the
savagery that incited it. When for a second time the Virgin passed unscathed through a conflagration
the Spanish infantry bore her on their shoulders about the streets, shouting in the joy of
her protection. A galleon having been endangered by rocks and bars in Manila Bay, the captain
borrowed this statue, prayed that it would secure the safety of his ship, and, to the wonder
of all, his vessel rode proudly up to the city gates, for the Virgin had ordered that the rocks
should sink deeper beneath the sea. Twice afterward she did a like service to captains who
borrowed the figure as a safeguard on the long voyage to Mexico and back, for each time she
suppressed great storms. At the time of the assault on Manila by the Dutch she assisted in
the defeat of the strangers, though St. Mark was associated with her in the victory. He had
told the governor in a dream that success should attend the Spanish arms if his people would
carry the Virgin into the fight. This was done, and the Dutch lost three ships with their cargoes.
She was finally domiciled in the town of Antipolo, which, beside being famous as a shrine,
has been one of the most noted resorts for brigands in the Philippines. The village of four
thousand people subsists largely on the money spent by pilgrims to her church.

Every family in the Christian communities has a little statue of the Virgin or of a patron
saint, to which prayers are addressed. Occasionally as much as a thousand dollars will be paid
for one of these images, for some have more power than others. When Tondo caught fire and was
reduced to ashes, the houses of mat and bamboo burning like paper, one thing alone survived
the flames: a wooden statue of Mary. This token of a special watch upon the figure immediately
raised its importance, and it was attired in the dress and ornaments of gold in which it may
now be seen. Not all the domestic saints are brilliantly dressed or originally expensive. One
Filipino family worshipped a portrait of Garibaldi that adorned the cover of a raisin box,
while a native elsewhere was found on his knees before a picture from an American comic paper
that represented President Cleveland attired as a monk and wearing a tin halo. Both of these
pictures had been placed on altars, and candles were burned before them.

Another statue of great power is in the church at Majajay. It was sent there from Spain in
charge of the friars, and is especially besought by invalids, for it is a general belief that
whosoever will reach the church with breath enough remaining in him to recite certain prayers
before this image shall have fresh lease of life; yea, though he were at his last gasp.

Some of the attacks made on the friars in the Philippines have been construed into attacks
on the Church, but this is wrong. For the good of the Church, no less than of the people, it
is desired to purge the islands of these ancient offenders. They have used religion as a cloak
for evil, have encouraged, in private, vices they preached against in public, have availed
themselves of famines and other distresses to force money from the poor, and have fathered
as many half-castes as the Spanish soldiers have. As to their offspring, Filipino wives have
quieted jealous husbands by assuring them that the appearance of a European complexion in a
hitherto brown family was a special favor from St. Peter,--a miracle ordered by the keeper
of heaven as a reward for piety and good works. Hence, one hears much of St. Peter's children
in the Philippines. Some of the white inhabitants have nevertheless been conspicuous for virtue.
Miguel Lopez de Legaspi, for example, the first ruler of the islands, was so good that for
years after his death his body, now in the St. Augustine Monastery, Manila, underwent no decay
or change, but was like that of a man in sleep.

Alitagtag, north of Bauan, became in 1595 a resort of ghosts and devils that congregated about
a spring near the village, so that the people were afraid to go there for water. A native headman
took wood from a deserted house, made a cross of it, and set it up near the spring to spell
away the fiends. As the people still feared, a woman of courage ventured near the place to
find that a stream of cold, pure water was flowing from one of the arms of the cross. To further
assure the people that the evil spirits had been mastered the cross arose from the earth and
stalked about the fields, surrounded by bright lights. Thereupon the clergy ordered that it
should be adored, and from that time it became an object of worship, healing diseases, dispelling
plagues, and killing locusts. When the priests at Bauan announced that they intended to move
the cross to Lake Bombon, the priest of Taal, being jealous of his brothers in the other town,
hired some natives to steal it and take it to his house. No sooner had the men assembled for
this purpose than sheets of green fire fell about the cross, defending it from their approach,
and in a frenzy of contrition they ran back, solemnly vowing that they would never make a similar
attempt again. The cross was, therefore, taken to Bauan, where it did service for the people
by terrorizing a band of pirates and by stopping an eruption of the Taal volcano in 1611. This
peak of Taal had been a resort of devils from time immemorial, and it had been a frequent duty
of the Church to pray them into silence. In the year just named Father Albuquerque headed a
procession that ascended the mountain for this purpose. Near the summit he paused and lifted
the cup containing the blood of Christ. Dreadful noises were heard, like the laughter of ten
thousand fiends, in vaults below. Then, with a groan and crash, the earth split and two craters
appeared, one filled with boiling sulphur, the other with green water. The cross was sent for.
It was brought by four hundred natives. When it was put into the priest's hands he lifted it
toward the sky and all united in prayer. During this petition, while every head was bent and
all eyes were shut, the craters softly closed and Taal was as it had been before. Yet the demons
still linger about the mountain. Not many years ago an Englishman tunnelled the peak for sulphur.
The fiends of the volcano shook the roof down on his head and he perished. In May it has been
a custom to hold a feast in honor of this cross, if the natives furnish the necessary candles
and raise ten dollars for the officiating priest.

Bangi, in Ilocos Norte, had a shrine in which was the image of a child with a lamb. Herbs pressed
against it would cure all diseases. For years a dispute was carried on between clerical factions
as to whether it represented St. John the Baptist or Christ. Bishop Miguel Garcia, having undressed
it and examined it thoroughly, decided it to be a Chinese idol. Thereupon it was broken and
burned as a thing unholy.

Our Lady of Casaysay, in Batangas, is so esteemed that ships salute her in passing. She was
found by a fisherman in his net. He took her to a cave, not knowing what to make of his strange
find, and intending to keep her there probably as a treasure not to be shared by his neighbors.
She astonished and disappointed him by proclaiming herself with flashing lights of beautiful
color and with loud music. As these demonstrations frightened the peaceable rustics, the Virgin
left her cave, visited a native woman, spoke kindly to her, and was thereupon provided with
a shrine, where she might be adored with proper ceremony.

The statue of St. Joaquin at Gusi is remarkable because every year it runs away and spends
two weeks with its wooden wife, the figure of St. Ann, at Molo.

Manila once had a saint that wagged its head approvingly at certain points in the sermon. This
conduct drove so many women into hysterics, and crowded the church so dangerously with people
who went to see the miracle, that the archbishop discountenanced its action, and ordered that
it should be quiet thereafter. Quiet was easily secured by cutting the string attached to the
saint's neck. The padre was accustomed to pull this during his discourse whenever he wished
his congregation to believe that the saints approved his eloquence or endorsed his doctrine.

Holy water from the Conception district of Panay saves life, and San Pascual Bailon cures barrenness.
A Manila milkman who was punished for selling watered milk expressed surprise at the complaints
of his customers, because no wrong had been committed, inasmuch as he had used nothing but
holy water, which was far superior to milk. Water from the prison well at Iloilo was held at
so high a value that the prison-keeper made a fortune from it, as it was given out that Christ
and the Virgin had been seen bathing in the well. Our Lady of the Holy Waters presides over
the hot springs below Maquiling Mountain, an old crater. Another popular place of pilgrimage
is the shrine at Tagbauang, near Iloilo, where illnesses are cured at a high mass in January.

One of the last recorded appearances of the Virgin was in 1884, when a band of robbers in Tayabas
killed a plantation manager, wounded several laborers, and ransacked the house of the owner.
While in one of the bedrooms tying clothes, jewelry, and other loot into parcels for removal,
the Virgin appeared, and standing in the door looked with severity and distress on the bandits.
They immediately left their plunder and ran pell-mell from the building. Some of these robbers
were arrested, but the Virgin had compassion on them for leaving the proceeds of their raid,
so none was garroted or even sentenced. Some go so far as to say that the Virgin had nothing
to do with their escape from punishment, alleging that the officers of the law had conspired
with them, and that the Spanish courts were even worse than those of a land that shall be nameless
in respect of their slowness and the facilities they offered for adjournments, retrials, and
appeals on grounds that if presented in any other cause than that of a breaker of the law would
be laughed to scorn. Filipino bandits often wear medals of the Virgin and saints to protect
them from harm, and some are made bold by confidence in their protection. It is a belief of
theirs that they will never be punished for any crime they may commit in Easter week, for the
rather obscure reason that Christ pardoned the thief on the cross on Good Friday.

A curious chapel on a bluff near Pasig, overlooking the river of that name, has the form of
a pagoda. It was built as a thank-offering by a Chinaman who, having been endangered by a crocodile,
and having called on men and joss without receiving an answer, prayed volubly to the Christians'
God as he swam toward the shore, and promised to erect a chapel in return for his life. His
prayer was answered, for the crocodile was turned to stone, and may now be seen in the bed
of the stream, while the grateful Mongol kept his word, and also joined the church.

Bankiva, the Philippine Pied Piper

Of nearly six hundred species of birds in the Philippines the jungle fowl, or bankiva, is best
known, and is both killed and domesticated. Unlike the dove, it does not understand human speech,
but it has a power over our kind that is exercised by no other animal. Once a year the spirits
grant to it this power of charming, in order that both spirits and birds may be revenged on
men, their constant enemies. When that day comes the Luzon mother tremblingly gathers her little
ones about her and warns them not to leave their door, for young ears heed the strange, sweet
music of the fowl's voice, which grown people cannot hear. On that day the bird sings with
a new note, and the flock of bankivas choose the largest, handsomest of their number to lead
the march of children. On the edge of the village he gives his song, and every toddler runs
delightedly to see what causes the music. Babes respond with soft, cooing notes, and will go
on hands and knees if they can. They find the bankivas gathered in a little ring, spreading
their tails and wings, dancing and singing in harmony, the head bird setting the air. When
the children have gathered, they, too, begin to dance and sing, following the birds as they
go deeper and deeper into the wood. Night falls, and with a harsh cry the bankivas fly away
in all directions. The children are as if awakened from a sleep. They do not know where they
are, and cannot tell which way to turn. Jungles and swamps are about them, man-eating crocodiles
are watching from the water, poisonous and strangling snakes are gliding about the brush, the
pythons that loop themselves from overhanging limbs are sometimes thrice the length of a man.
Dread and danger are on every hand. And at home the mothers sit crying. Sometimes, though rarely,
a man or woman totters back to a village bearing marks of great age, and is sure that he or
she left there only the night before. These wanderers do not know where they have been. They
remember only that the bankiva sang sweetly, and they followed it, as the children of Hamelin
followed the pied piper.

The Crab Tried to Eat the Moon

Among the fantastic stories told of snakes, water-buffalo, birds, and sharks are several that
have obvious meaning. The crab figures in certain of these tales as the cause of the tides.
He was an enormous creature and lived in a great hole in the bottom of a distant sea, whence
he crawled twice a day, the water pouring into the hollow then, and leaving low water on the
coast. When he settled back again the water was forced out and the tide was high. The relation
of tides to the moon may have introduced this creature in another aspect as the moon's enemy
and cause of her eclipse, for it is related that one evening a Filipino princess walking on
a beach saw with astonishment an island that had never been visible on the sea before. Her
emotion was that of alarm when she saw the island approach the shore, and she hid in the shrubbery
to watch. Presently she could make out, despite the failing light, that it was no island, but
a crab larger than a hundred buffalo. Its goggling eyes were dreadful to see, its mouth was
opening fiercely, its claws working as if eager to clutch its prey. The moon arose at the full,
making a track of light across the heaving waters, and the crab, facing east, prepared to spring
and drag it to its den beneath the ocean. Half a mile away the people of the princess were
holding a feast with songs and dances. Would they hear a signal? She placed her conch-shell
horn at her lips and blew with all her strength. The monster still gnashed and grasped in expectancy
at the sea's edge, and a breeze brought through the wood a faint sound of drums. Her people
had not heard. Again she blew. This time the woods were still. Her people were listening. A
third blast followed, and in a few minutes the warriors swarmed upon the beach with knives,
swords, and lances. While the princess was explaining to them the moon's peril the crab made
a leap into the air and darkened its face, causing an eclipse, but failing to get a hold it
dropped back to the beach again, where the people fell upon it, the princess leading the attack
with the war-call of her tribe. As the crab turned to see what had befallen, the princess slashed
off his great left claw. With the other it crushed a soldier, but again her cresse fell and
the right claw fell likewise. Then a hundred men rushed upon the creature, prodding their spears
into joints of his legs and the dividing line between his back plate and belly. Others fell
under his great bulk or were gnashed by his iron teeth, but in the end his shell was broken
and the moon was safe. And often when the gentle pirate of the Sulus scoured the sea he uttered
a prayer before an image of the princess for a bright night and an easy victim, for had it
not been for her the crab would have swallowed the moon, and the sea would have been as dark
as some kinds of a conscience.

The Conversion of Amambar

While roving over the waters that covered the earth the sun god saw the nymph Ursula sporting
in the waves, and was smitten with a quick and mighty fondness. He nearly consumed himself
in the ardor of his affection. She, however, was as cold and pure as the sea. As she swung
drowsily on the billows she was like a picture painted in foam on their blue-green depth, and
in breathing her bosom rose and fell like the waves themselves. As she saw the god descending
she was filled with alarm, but as he took her into his strong embrace and placed his cheek
to hers a new life and warmth came to her, and in their marriage the spirits of the air and
water rejoiced. A son was born to them,--so beautiful a boy that the sun god made a land for
him, stocked it with living creatures, adorned it with greenery and flowers, and gave it to
the human race as an inheritance of joy forever. This land he called Cebu, and no land was
more lovely. Lupa was the child, and from him came all the kings of Cebu, among them Amambar,
the first chief of the island of whom we have definite record. In the day of his rule the group
had long been peopled, and the use of tools and weapons had become known. One occasionally
finds to-day the stone arrows and axes they called "lightning teeth," and with which they worked
such harm to one another in their many wars.

It was an evening of March, 1521, a calm and pleasant evening, with the perfume of flowers
mixed with the tonic tang of the ocean, birds flying and monkeys chattering in the wood, and
a gentle surf whispering upon the beach. Amambar was walking on the shore alone. He had gone
there to watch the gambols of the mermaids, when a great light whitened against the sunset.
It came from a cross that had been planted just out of reach of the sea. He put his hands before
his eyes that it might not dazzle him. Then, as the moon arose, he peered beneath his hands,
out over the restless water, and there, against the golden globe that was lifting over the
edge of the world, could be seen a flock of monster birds with gray wings, and dark men walking
on their backs as they lightly rode the billows, the men sparkling and glinting as they moved,
for they were arrayed in metal and bore long knives and lances that flashed like stars. Other
of the company wore black robes and sang in unknown words, their voices mixing in a music never
heard by Amambar before. A sparkling white cloud drooped slowly from the sky. A diamond vapor
played about the cross. Out of the cloud came a melodious voice saying, "Look up, O chief!"
And looking at the cross again, he saw, extended there, a bleeding figure with a compassionate
face that gazed down upon him and declared, "I am Jesus Christ, son of the only God. Those
whom you see in the ships are my people, who have come to these islands to rule you for your
good." Amambar fell prone on the sand and prayed for a long time, not daring to open his eyes.
When he regained courage and arose the cloud was gone; the ships had sailed away. He was alone.

The commander of the ships was Magellan. It was one of his monks who had placed the cross on
shore. Landing in Cebu later, he converted two thousand of the natives in a day by destroying
the statue of Vishnu and putting that of the child Jesus in its place, though he still yielded
to savage opinion in so far as he consented to confirm his friendship with the king by a heathen
ceremony, each opening a vein in his arm and drinking the blood of the other. As usual, the
appearance and ways of the Europeans smote the natives with wonder. They described the strangers
as enormous men with long noses, who dressed in fine robes, ate stones (ship-bread), drank
fire from sticks (pipes), and breathed out the smoke, commanded thunder and lightning from
metal tubes, and were gods. Engaging in a wrangle between two tribes, Magellan was lured into
a marsh at Mactan, and there, while watching a battle to see how great the Filipinos could
be in war, he was slain with bamboo lances sharpened and hardened in fire. Amambar's Christianity
did not endure, for he so wearied of the oppression and rapacity of the strangers that when
a successor to Magellan appeared he invited him to a banquet and slew him at his meat. But
the cross and the statue of Christ worked miracles among the faithful for many generations.

The Bedevilled Galleon

    "Sing hey, sing ho! The wind doth blow,
    And I'll meet my love in the morning,"

Sang the lookout, as he paced the forecastle of the galleon Rose of May, and peered about for
signs of land against the dawn. Not that he expected to meet his love in the morning, nor for
many mornings, but he had been up in his off-watch and was getting drowsy, so that he sang
to keep himself awake. His was one of the first among the English ships to follow in Magellan's
track. The Philippines, or the Manillas, as they were called, had been almost reached, and
it was expected that Mindanao would be sighted at break of day off the starboard bow.

"Hello, forward!" bawled the man at the helm.

"Ay, ay!" sang the lookout.

"What d'ye make o' yonder light?"

"Light? What d'ye mean, man?" And the lookout rubbed his eyes, scanned the water close and
far, and wondered if his sight was going out.

"In the sky, o' course, ye bumble-brain."

"Now, by the mass, you costard, you gave me a twist of the inwards with your lame joke."

"'Tis no joke. Will you answer?"

"Why, then, 'tis the daylight, in course, and you aiming for it that steady as to drive the
nose of us straight agin the sun, give he comes up where he threats to. And he'll be here straightway,
for in these waters he comes up as he were popped outen a cohorn."

"The day! Heaven forefend! I'm holding her to the north."

"You're holding due east. Aha! Look yonder, where the cloud is lifting. Land ho!"

"Where away?" cried a mate, roused out of a forbidden doze by this talk, and blundering up
to the roof of the after-castle.

"Port bow, sir."

"Port bow! The fiend take us! You block! You jolterhead! Where are you fetching us?"

"I'm holding her due to the north, sir, as you bade me," faltered the steersman. "Look for
yourself, if it please you, for 'tis light enough to read the card without the binnacle lamp.
We're sailing east by the sky and north by the needle. The ship's bedevilled!"

"Hold your peace, or you'll have the crew in a fright. Head her around eight points to port,
and keep her west by the card."

"Lights in, sir? The sun is up," called the lookout.

"Yes." And the mate added in a lower tone, "'Tis the first time ever the sun came up in the north."

"What's all this gabble?" grumbled the captain, thrusting his red and whiskered face out of
the cabin. "Can't a man have his rest when you keep the watch, Master Roaker?"

"Pray, captain, come and look at the compass. Do you see the lay o' the needle? We're sailing
west to hold north, or else the sun has missed stays over night and come up in the north himself."

"Hi, hi! That's parlous odd. Keep her as you have her, and have out Bill, the carpenter, to
see if there's any iron overside. Nay, let her off a little more, for that's a hard-looking
piece of shore out yonder, for all of the palms and green stuff."

The watch was changed presently, the captain preferring to take the biscuit and spirits that
were his breakfast on the deck. He went to the compass every minute or so, looked curiously
at the draw of the sails and studied the water alongside. The carpenter had reported all sound,
with no iron out of place to deflect the needle. There was a grave look on the faces of the
officers, and the men talked low together as they watched them.

"Strange-looking hill out yonder," remarked a mate. "Not a tree on it, nor any green thing.
'Tis black and shining enough for the devil's grave-stone."

"Have done with your gossip of devils," snorted the other mate. "You're as evil a man for a
ship's company as a whistler. You'll be calling ill luck on us to name the fiend so often."

"Looks like shoal water forward, sir," called the new lookout.

"Right! Head her away to port yet farther. Look you, fellow, have you no inkling of your business?
You'll have us all ashore. Mary, mother! Give me the helm!" With sweat bursting from his brow
the captain caught the tiller and put it hard over. The ship shook a bit, swerved, yet made
side-wise toward the green patch on the sea. The land was looming large now.

"'Tis not in the rudder to keep her off, sir," called a mate who had gone forward. "'Tis the
leeway she is making."

"There's a scant breeze."

"Ay, but there must be a fearsome current."

"I see no sign of it. This water is smooth as any pond."

"But you see for yourself, she's gaining on the shore. Look, now, how we're passing that patch
o' water-weed."

"I think hell is under us. Have up the clerk and put him at prayers, and you fellows take in
sail--each rag of it--that if we strike we may go easy. Call all hands. See that the boats
are clear. She minds her helm no more than a straw. God help us!"

The galleon was at the edge of the shoal spot now, and all held their breath, expecting to
hear the grinding of the keel on a bank; but, no, she floated in safety.

"Sound!" commanded the captain. "There may be anchorage."

"Four fathom," called the sailor at the lead after he had made his cast.

"Stand by to let go. We'll tie up here till the tide turns or the spell's worked out. Alive--alive,
there! Get that anchor overboard."

"It be wedged agin the bulwark, captain, and needs another pair o' hands."

"Forward all! Why, you lump, the flukes are clear. What ails you? Lift all. There!"

With an united heave the sailors raised the barbed iron and cast it over the side. The faces
of all dripped and went white, and their knees bent then, for the anchor flew from their hands
and struck the sea quite twenty feet away,--in deep water, for the shoal was passed,--and the
chain paid out like rope as the iron sank, yet not straight down. It rattled off toward the shore.

"We've had krakens and mermaids and all variety of horrid beasts," said one old tar, with his
jaw a-shaking, "and now the foul fiend has that anchor, and is pulling us ashore with it."

The chain had run out to its length, but the anchor had found no bottom. A cracking and grinding
of the links could be heard, as if a tug of war were going on between two giants that had this
chain between them. Bits of rust powdered off, and the strain was tearing splinters from the
timbers. A loud snap,--the chain had parted. Down went the anchor, but again not straight,--off
toward the land, and one free link of the chain shot as if from a gun straight toward the shore,
whizzing with ever-increasing speed until it was out of sight. The men looked at one another
in amaze.

"Get up the stores," shouted the captain, "and be ready all to quit the ship." He added to
his mates, "A half hour's the longest we can hope for. The Rose of May will be on the black
cliff by that. Is the clerk praying? Good! We may get away in the boats, but we'll end our
days here in the Manillas. Alack, my Betsy! I'll never look into her eyes again."

"She's down a little by the head, an't please you," cried a sailor, running aft.

"Ease her a little, then. Toss over some of the dunnage."

"Lor'! Lor'! Spare us all this day!" yelled a sailor a minute later.

"What is it?"

"I tried to put my knife on the rail here, while I gripped the line I was to cut, when it tugged
at my hand like a live thing. In a fright I let go, and away it flew toward the shore. Oh,
we've reached the Devil's country. Why ever did I leave England?"

"How of the compass?"

"It points steady to that rock."

"Master captain! Master captain!" shouted the steward, running upon deck. "The fiend is in
the after-castle, for the pans and the knives and a blunderbuss and two cutlasses that were
loose have leaped against the forward panelling and stick there as if rivets were through them.
'Tis wizard's work. Let us pray, all."

A sudden commotion was seen among the sailors at that moment. The cannon balls had rolled forward
to the break of the forecastle, and the two guns themselves--the ship's armament against the
pirates of China and Sulu--were straining at their stays.

"Heave over the shot. It'll lighten her," ordered the captain.

The crew obeyed, but after the first of the balls had been lifted over the bulwarks, they had
scarce the strength to cast out the rest, for amazement overcame them on seeing the shot plucked
from the man's hands and blown through the air as if sent from its gun toward the rock. The
ship was leaping through the water, though the breeze was from the land. One after another
the men fell on their knees and prayed loudly, the captain last of all. Suddenly he looked
up, with a wondering flash in his eyes. He sprang to his feet, plucked an iron belaying-pin
from its ledge, held it up, felt it pull, let go, and saw it whirl away like a leaf in a cyclone.
He looked at the compass; the needle pointed straight toward the black and glistening cliff
now lowering not more than half a mile ahead.

"It's the guns," he shrieked. "Up with you. Cut away the lashings. Stave down the bulwarks.
Let them go."

In the panic there was no stopping to argue or to question. The guns were freed, and they,
too, went hurtling through the air, striking the rock with a clang. The captain leaped to the
helm and put it hard a-starboard. The ship's pace slackened, she curved gracefully around,
and headed from the threatening coast. "Shake out all sail, lads, for we're free at last, by
God's good grace."

Though trembling and confused, the sailors managed to hoist sail, and on a gentle wind from
the east they left that coast never more to venture near it. The captain's face lost its knots
and seams, by slow degrees the color of it returned,--a color painted upon it, especially about
the nose, by many winds, much sunshine, and uncounted bottles of strong waters. He wiped his
brow and drew a big breath. "It comes to me, now," he said. "We've not been bewitched. That
hill beyond, that's robbed us of our guns and anchor, is a magnet,--the biggest in the world."

In an earthquake, several years later, the magnet-mountain disappeared.

Two Runaways from Manila

The name Corregidor, which stands for mayor, albeit the translation is corrector, is applied
to the gateway to Manila. Thus named it was a place to inspire a wholesome fear in the breasts
of dignitaries, for on at least two occasions proud and refractory bishops were sent there
in exile to endure a season of correction and repentance. It was thought to be a desert. In
the seventeenth century the treasure galleon arriving at Manila, after a voyage of months from
Mexico, brought a family from that country. One of the daughters of this house of Velez was
a girl with a bit of human nature in her composition, for Maria was prone to flirting, and
had no affection for sermons. In order to repress her high spirits and love of mischief, she
was sent by her father to the convent of Santa Clara, which had been founded in 1621 (a few
years before this incident). The parent even hoped that she might qualify as a nun.

It was not the right convent, for Fray Sanchez, one of the fathers, who said the offices in
the chapel, was a Franciscan friar, young, handsome, and not an ascetic. The novice was always
prompt when he said mass, and often when her pretty head should have been bowed in prayer she
was peeping over the edge of her breviary, following the graceful motions of the brother as
he shone in full canonicals in the candle-light, and thrilling at the sound of his rich, low
voice. The priest several times caught the glance of those eyes, so black, so liquid, saw the
long fringe of lashes fall across them, saw the face bend behind the prayer-book in a vain
endeavor to hide a flush, realized what a pretty face it was, and went to his cell with a vague
aching at his heart. He sought Maria among the pupils to give spiritual advice, or she sought
him to ask it,--it little matters,--and so the first full moon looked into a corner of the
convent garden and saw, despite the swaying shadow of vines and palms, that the friar was making
confession to the nun,--a confession of love. The face that had peered above the prayer-book
was lifted to his, a white arm stole about his neck: it was the answering confession. The priest
strained her to his breast and half stifled her with kisses.

These raptures were interrupted by the retiring bell, and they hastily returned to the convent
by separate ways. It was the last night they expected to spend beneath that roof, for a galleon
was to sail for Mexico in a day or two, and they had agreed to elope. Dressed in worldly garb,
which she concealed under the robe and cowl of a monk, Maria slipped through the garden gate
next day, met her lover, ran to the shore, where a boat had been tied, crossed with him to
Camaya, the ship being promised there for a fag end of cargo, and prayed for a quick departure
from the Philippines. In vain. They fell into the hands of unfriendly natives, who, having
learned to distrust the Spanish, were always ready to wreak small injuries on them when the
chance afforded. These natives attempted to separate the pair and drag the girl to their huts.
The friar attacked them with spirit, but the brown men were too many for him, and in the melee
both he and Maria were wounded.

A boat was seen approaching. The assailants fled, leaving the friar, bleeding and weak, but
kneeling beside his mistress, whose white skin was splashed and striped with red, and whose
liquid eyes stared vacantly at the sky. As the boat touched the shore the corregidor leaped
from it, and the friar now confronted a new peril. His flight had been discovered, the town-crier
had bawled it through the streets, commanding the people to refuse shelter to the guilty pair
under heavy penalty, and, to enforce their return, the mayor had brought with him twelve soldiers
of the garrison. The loaded arquebuses of the men were not needed. Feeble, sore in body and
spirit, repentant, the monk surrendered, Maria was lifted into the boat, and the company returned
to Manila.

There it was decided that the monk should be sent to an inland mission, that in the lifting
of souls to a finer faith the stain of human love that had fallen upon his own soul might be
wiped away. As to the girl, her good looks and gay disposition had proved the undoing of one
devotee. She was to have no chance to enslave another; so she was sent back to Mexico, forced
to enter a cloistered nunnery, and so ended her life in loneliness and sanctity. The incident
has left its impress on the names about the harbor, Corregidor being so called for the officer
who pursued and arrested the runaways, Camaya being rechristened Mariveles,--which, you see,
is Maria Velez,--while two rocks beyond the Boca Grande are named for the friar and his would-be
bride,--Fraile and Monja: monk and nun.

The Christianizing of Wong

In the city of Cebu the Chinese, who made an early settlement, accepted the prevalent religion
in order to keep peace with the authorities. In fact, it was a choice between going to church
and going back to China. Incidentally to their evangelization a number of them were cast into
prison, their shops and houses were rifled, and laws were enacted denying rights and privileges
to all Mongols who refused Christian baptism. Among the refractory citizens was a Chinese trader
named Wong. So far as anybody could see, he led as moral a life as a Chinaman can endure comfortably;
he was good to his family, good to himself, he was sober, he would overreach a Spaniard when
he could, but when he had given his word he kept it; he burned incense before joss, he read
the analects of Kung Foo Too and Mang Tse, and worshipped his ancestors; he never stole or
used any kind of profanity that moral Spaniards could understand. For all this he was nagged
and worried constantly, and could hardly take a walk without being pursued by friars who requested
alms for their charities in so pointed a manner that he contributed with celerity, if with
an inward lack of willingness. If he had been an every-day Chinaman he would have been killed,
or prisoned, or exiled, or deported, but he had an excellent trade, and, in spite of his enforced
outlays for masses and missionaries, was growing richer all the time. The customs officers
thrived on the duties that he paid, and waxed exceeding fat.

One elderly priest in Cebu had a genuine concern for the welfare of this prosperous but benighted
soul. He called at his shop, he barred his way in the street, he argued, he cited, he appealed,
but to no effect. Wong answered that, although a heathen, he was doing a better business than
any one else; so what was the use of changing gods? And with a heart-deep sigh he requested
the clergyman to change the subject. Seeing, at last, that all customary methods of conversion
were doomed to failure, the friar betook himself to the shrine of St. Nicholas, and asked him
to do something that should turn this poor soul to the faith. St. Nicholas praised his petitioner's
zeal, and promised to work a miracle. The friar possessed his soul in patience, and the conversion
came that very week. Wong was assailed in his office by five robbers, armed with knives and
daubed with blood, to show that they intended neither to give nor ask for quarter. He had sold
many goods that day, and they had come for his money. Wong reached for the sword that always
hung within his grasp, but to his dismay it was gone. St. Nicholas or the friar had hidden
it. He glanced rapidly about the room, but saw nothing that he could oppose to the knives of
the desperadoes, and even if he had, they were five to one, so his escape from a cruel death
seemed impossible. Just then the robbers were struck into a stupor, for on the wall behind
the merchant a light was shining, and soft music floated through the room. The partition opened,
and St. Nicholas stepped within the apartment. Turning to the Chinaman the visitant said, "Believe
in the true faith, Wong, and your life shall be saved. Believe otherwise, and you shall die."
Wong changed his faith in one second, and said so. The saint waved his hand toward the ruffians
and they dropped to the floor in a faint, whereupon Wong, plucking the knife from the hand
of the nearest, carefully but expeditiously and joyfully cut the throats of all five, called
in his neighbors and persuaded them to join the church with him. They did this almost immediately,
and the most popular saint among the Chinese of Cebu is still St. Nicholas.

The Devil's Bridge

You may say what you please, but it is certain that the Evil One never appeared in the Philippines
until after the Spanish had taken possession of the islands. At least, this applies to Luzon.
And, strange to tell, he has not been seen there since the Spanish left. Some will have it
that he was smitten into a despairing bashfulness during Weyler's administration, and that
when the governor went home with a couple of million dollars in his valise--the savings from
his salary--the Devil went home likewise, awe-struck. His Satanic Majesty's last recorded exploit
occurred in the view of three men, of whom one may still be alive to vouch for it. They were
farmers of Wild Laguna, a few miles above Manila, and on one memorable day were cutting wood
in the ravine near by,--a deep gulch through which babbles a stone-choked stream. This glen
has precipitous sides, but is so thickly overhung with green that it is almost like a verdant cave.

While they were resting--and the Filipino's ability to rest is one of his striking qualities--they
were startled by the hurried advance of something, or somebody, on the bank. There was a swish
and crash of undergrowth, a hobbling stamp, and something that sounded like the smiting of
leaves with a club. At first the farmers thought that a water buffalo had run away from some
plantation and was angry because he could not descend the craggy sides and reach the water.
Then came a volley of expletives in an unknown tongue, and in a voice so deep and harsh that
the hair of the three heads bristled, and three pairs of eyes goggled with fright. The farmer
who was good crossed himself; the one who was bad turned white and tried to remember how prayers
were said; the one who was betwixt-and-between clung to the stone on which he was seated and
held his breath; for a tall, lank personage, with overhanging brows, slanting eyes, long chin
and nose, and wrathful aspect, was striding to and fro on the edge of the ravine, looking at
the opposite bank as if trying to decide whether or not he could leap that distance. He was
scowling, gnashing his teeth, and brandishing his arms. Any Spaniard might have done as much,
and brandished a sword besides; but the terrible thing about this gentleman was the great length
of tail, with a dart at its tip, that he was flourishing among the bushes, for only one being,
on the earth or under it, was known to have a toil like that.

As if to leave no doubt, the stranger, in stamping on the ground, lifted his leg so high that
the watchers could see that it ended, not in a foot, but a hoof. In the uninterrupted narrative,
the one topic follows directly upon the other. He states first, that the streams of living water
flow from Him (vii. 37 sq). He speaks 'again' ([Greek: palin]), and declares that He is the light
of the world (viii. 12 sq). But the intervention of this story dislocates the whole narrative,
introducing a change of time, of scene, of subject.

On the other hand, it will be felt that the incident, though misplaced here, must be authentic in
itself. Its ethical pitch is far above anything which could have been invented for Him by
His disciples and followers, 'whose character and idiosyncrasies,' as Mr Mill says, 'were of
a totally different sort' [204:1]. They had neither the capacity to imagine nor the will to
invent an incident, which, while embodying the loftiest of all moral teaching, would seem to them dangerously
lax in its moral tendencies.

But, if so, how came it to find a place in the copies of St John's Gospel? Ewald incidentally
throws out a suggestion [204:2] that it was originally written on the margin of some ancient
manuscript, to illustrate the words of Christ in John viii. 15, 'Ye judge after the flesh; I
judge no man.' This hint he has not followed up, but it seems to me to be highly valuable. The
pericope in question occurs, in most authorities which contain it,
after vii.

52; in one MS however it stands after vii. 36; and in several it is placed at the end of the
Gospel. This is just what might have been expected if it was written, in the first instance,
on the margin of a MS containing two or three columns on a page. When transferred from the margin
to the text, it would find a place somewhere in the neighbourhood, where it least interfered with
the narrative, or, if no suitable place appeared, it would be relegated to the end of the book.
It should be added, that some good cursives give it at the end of the twenty-first chapter
of St Luke--the most appropriate position, historically, that could be found for it. Whether
this was an independent insertion in St Luke, or a transference from St John made on critical grounds,
it is not easy to say.
But if this was the motive of the insertion, what was its source?
Have we not here one of those illustrative anecdotes which Papias
derived from the report of the elders, and to which he 'did not scruple
to give a place along with his interpretations' of our Lord's sayings?
Its introduction as an illustration of the words in John viii. The good one may yet be in the land of the
living, unless he enlisted under Aguinaldo, which is not likely, because old men cannot run
fast enough to be effective members of the Filipino army.

The Great Earthquake

After months of fighting, Li Ma Hong, the Chinese pirate, and his six thousand followers had
been beaten out of Philippine waters. Manila was celebrating the victory on this last night
of November, 1645. The church bells had been clanging and chiming, the windows had been lighted,
flags and pennants had streamed from the house-tops, sounds of music and cries of rejoicing
were heard, a thousand fairy lamps starred the darkness and quivered in the Pasig. The flag
of Spain had been carried through the streets in solemn procession, the cathedral altar had
smoked with incense, the friars had chanted the "Te Deum," but now all was gayety and music
and perfume. A ball was among the festivities, and military and civic officers, pranked in
the lace and bullion so dear to the Latins, were going through the narrow ways with their ladies
on their arms. Taking no part in the joyous hurly-burly, two men walked apart, near the cathedral,
in talk. One was a father in the church; the other, secretary and major-domo of the governor.
The calling of the one, the age and dignity of the other, to say nothing of an old wound that
gave a hitch and drag to his step, forbade their mingling with the throng.

The secretary spoke: "No, father, I hardly agree with your view. That heaven has been on our
side I admit, since we have conquered the infidels, seized their treasure, and strewn their
corpses on our shores. But that the blessed St. Francis interposes in our behalf, I doubt."

"This is dangerous doctrine,--a reflection on our order. We have prayed daily for the success
of the Spanish arms, and although we addressed the Virgin and all the saints, the statue of
St. Francis is the only one that moved while we were at prayer----"

"With your eyes on the ground?"

"The sacristan saw it. Furthermore, let me tell you that the figure of the saint owned by the
worthy Indian, Alonzo Cuyapit, at his house in Dilao, was stirred to tears last night."

"Tears! For victory?"

"I fear, for some reason worthy of tears."

"And your imaginations have nothing to do with all this? Men who are wasted with vigils and
fasting"--here the secretary chuckled and made as if he would nudge the churchman in his ample
paunch--"are prone to see what common men cannot. Though I protest that when I eat much cheese
before retiring I have visions, too. But not always holy ones."

The priest answered with gravity, "A life of devotion does clear the vision. It opens the gates
of heaven. I fear, señor, that too many in this doubting age are affected like you,--that a
study of philosophy and ungodly sciences has harmed your respect for the saints and the church."

"By no means, father. All I maintain is that the figure of St. Francis was not seen in the
thick of the battle, as some of the friars allege. Good sooth! What do they know of battle?
Our victories were won by stout Spanish arms and good Toledo steel. All praise to Heaven that
we had the power."

The priest shook his head and sighed. Then he looked curiously into the sky. The stars were
shining, save in the south, where lightning flickered in a bank of cloud, and there was no
threat of storm. Yet in the air was a curious stagnation that had fallen within the hour and
brooded over the city like a palpable thing. It was hot and close and lifeless; stale smells
from the streets reeked into the nostrils, and from the Pasig came a heavy, sickish odor of
river vegetation.

"Sometimes it fills me with a fear that Heaven has a punishment in store for us," said the
priest, stopping in his walk and looking meditatively into the distance, where the lightning
now played more brightly. "We have grown worldly. We have thought less of serving God by our
wars than of increasing our power and importance in the eyes of the nations. We have grown
proud. We are in danger of losing our piety. Pray that the wrath do not fall."

"With all my heart,--especially to-night. Your blessing, father. And sound sleep."

It was the last time that these friends were to walk together. It was the last time in many
a day when Manila would be in gala. At midnight the greasy calm that lay on the sea was broken
by a breeze which ruffled the water and made a pleasant stir in the trees ashore. It eased
the sultriness of the night and brought rest to many who had been tossing on their beds, excited
doubtless by the shows and dissipations of the last few hours. Presently the sleepers were
roused again, for the wind was rising steadily; the trees were writhing and wringing their
branches in what was surely going to be a gale. The lightning was near. A growl of thunder
could be heard. The clock boomed the hour of two. Out of an intense dark leaped a bolt of green
fire, and the air was filled with baying and cannonade. Almost at the moment the earth began
to rock. The city awoke. The rocking increased. Roofs began to fall, walls to bulge, masonry
to split and sway.

"The earthquake! The earthquake!" screamed a thousand voices, and with cries and lamenting
the people hurried into the streets and fell on their knees or their faces, unable to stand
on the waving, trembling ground. It was an hour of terror. All lights were blown out by the
storm or extinguished in the fall of houses, save one or two of baleful meaning that flickered
above roofs which had caught fire. The sea could be heard advancing toward the land with tremendous
roaring, driving up the channel of the Pasig and overspreading its banks on either side, while
far below, and most dreadful of all, the fall could be heard of pieces of the earth's crust
into pits of fire and the vast rumble and groan of a world. Houses crumbled, people were pressed
to death and maimed in the blackness, streets cracked asunder, trees were uprooted, chaos was
come again.

In the morning the survivors looked upon a scene of ruin worse than any wrought by the pirates.
The sanctity of the cathedral had not saved it. Of its imposing walls hardly anything remained.
A heap of masonry marked its place. Every public building was destroyed. Wretches hurt to the
death were pinned under fallen stones and timbers, and many, willing enough to relieve them,
were too dazed and agonized by their own pains and misfortunes to pull their wits together.
Spain had enjoyed her triumphs. Now her calamities had begun.

On the night before the catastrophe, Alonzo Cuyapit, a rich Indian of Dilao, a suburb of the
city, and his friend, the chaplain of the San Francisco Convent, were at prayers together before
a statue of St. Francis, that was the Indian's dearest pride. He had shrined it fittingly in
his home, with flowers and candles about it, and adored it daily. The statue was of life-size,
the work of an adept carver; was brilliantly painted and gemmed, and had about the neck a rosary
from which hung a cross of polished gold. So many miracles of healing had been performed by
this figure that its renown had gone through all Luzon.

While Cuyapit and the chaplain were on their knees a tremor shook the floor. Slight earthquakes
of this kind were not unusual. Though the walls of the house rattled, the statue remained fixed
and still. Another jar was felt in the ground, and raising their hands to the saint, the petitioners
begged him fervently to intercede against a dangerous shock. Presently they lifted their eyes,
and were struck dumb with amazement, for the statue had unclasped its hands, the one pointing
toward Manila, as if in warning; the other holding the golden cross toward heaven, as if in
an appeal for mercy. A halo, so bright as to dazzle the beholders, played about the head, the
lips moved, and from the upturned eyes tears trickled down the cheeks. Cuyapit and the priest
arose and tried to stanch these tears, but the cloth they used was soon as wet as if they had
just taken it from the river. Then the statue raised its arms high over its head, as in a last
appeal for mercy to the world, while the tears gushed in such a stream that they made a continuous
fall to the floor. A look of horror wrung the face, as if the prayer had been refused; and,
extending its hands in benediction, the saint toppled from his pedestal and was broken into
fragments.

When these occurrences had been told by Cuyapit in the Church of San Francisco, under an oath
before the Virgin, the pieces were carried in reverential procession to Manila, and the miracle
of San Francisco of the Tears is accepted there as history.

Suppressing Magic in Manila

Crowds of all kinds are easily swayed, but it is said that nowhere is it so easy to rouse a
panic or a revolution as in Manila. Several times during the earlier months of the American
occupation vague fears spread through the city, people ran to their homes or locked themselves
in their shops in terror, lights were put out, armed guards were posted; then, after a few
hours, everybody asked everybody else what the matter had been, and nobody knew.

In 1820 a strange scene was enacted in the Philippine capital. People assembled in groups at
evening and whispered mysteriously. Gowned friars moved from group to group, but whether encouraging
or expostulating it was impossible for one to say, unless he understood Spanish or Tagalog.
The captain of an American ship that was taking on its load of hemp reported to a neighbor
captain, who sailed under the cross of St. George, that there had been a violation of the government
order against the importing of Protestant Bibles and pocket-pistols,--two things taboo in the
country at that time. This, however, may have been the Yankee captain's joke. As the night
deepened torches were seen flitting hither and thither, the crowds thickened, the whispers
and hushed talk increased by degrees to a widespread, menacing growl, then arose to a roar.
Now drums were heard in the barracks, and the light, quick tread of marching feet could be
distinguished through the babble of voices. The mob was slowly wedging itself into one of the
streets before an inn, and just at the doors of that hostelry the noise was loudest and most
threatening.

Presently came a crash. The building had been entered. Instantly there were shouts and cries,
and the throng seemed fairly to boil with anger. In the light of candles that shone through
windows the faces lifted toward the tavern were drawn and wolfish. Shots were heard. The mob
was shaken, as a wood is shaken by a gale, but there was no retreat. There could be none. The
people were packed too densely. Now a glint of bayonets was seen at one end of the street,
and some sharp orders rang out. This was more effective. The throng began to thin away at the
farther end, and those nearest to the soldiers attempted to break through the line, loudly
declaring that they were merely spectators, and did not know what had happened. But in another
moment everybody knew. Two dark shapes were passed out at the inn door, and were, in some fashion,
pushed along over the heads of the multitude to its freer edge. These shapes had recently been
men. With ropes about their necks they were dragged at a run through the streets. More houses
were attacked. Other forms were found lying on the earth, pulseless, bloody, after the mob
had passed. The military was, seemingly, unable to head it off or give effective chase. Flames
now lighted various quarters of the city, and shots were frequently heard. It was a night of
terror. History speaks of it as a night of rioting. Many declare that it was a St. Bartholomew
massacre, on a smaller scale, and that the Protestants who were killed that night were put
to death at the instigation of the friars. Tradition relates that when the sun arose the people,
numbering thousands, marched in triumph through the city, following a dozen of their number
who bore in their hands the phials in which two French naturalists, recently landed in Luzon,
had preserved a number of snakes and insects for their scientific collection.

There was the mischief,--in those jars and bottles. Nobody would put a serpent or a scorpion
into alcohol except for some grim purpose, and that purpose could be nothing other than black
magic. Hence the raid on the inn; hence the killing of the naturalists and of other people
suspected of complicity or sympathy with forbidden arts; hence the state of education of Luzon.

Faith that Killed

Back in the 30's an emigrant of some account arrived in Manila. He was a young doctor of medicine
who had just won his sheepskin in Salamanca, and had been persuaded that there was small hope
of a living for him in a province where the people were too poor to be ill and too lazy to
die. The Philippines had been suggested as a promising field for his practice, and realizing
that he needed practice he made the long journey around Good Hope and reached the Luzon capital
nearly penniless, but full of gratitude and expectancy. Having secured lodgings, to which he
at once affixed his shingle, he sallied forth to see the town and its people, and one of the
first of its inhabitants to claim his attention, though she claimed it unwittingly, was a girl
of the lower class who was walking along the street with an easy, elastic step, and in seeming
health, yet who was evidently suffering from a hemorrhage, for at every few paces she paused
and spat blood. Her bearing and expression were in odd contrast with her peril, for she seemed
indifferent to the danger.

Prompted by compassion as well as by a professional interest, the physician followed the invalid,
expecting at every moment to see her fall or hear her beg for help, his wonder at the stoicism
and endurance of the Filipino growing constantly. When she reached her home, an humble house
in a poor quarter of the city, he begged immediate audience with her parents, who were, unfortunately,
acquainted with the Spanish tongue, and told them it was his duty to warn them that the girl
had not twenty-four hours to live; that she was afflicted with a mortal illness; that a priest
should be called at once. Works and Editions.--Leland said that it is easier to collect the leaves
of the Sibyl than the titles of the works written by Roger Bacon; and though the labour has been
somewhat lightened by the publications of Brewer and Charles, referred to below, it is no easy
matter even now to form an accurate idea of his actual productions. An enormous number of MSS.
are known to exist in British and French libraries, and probably
not all have yet been discovered.


Neighbors flocked in to offer condolences and comforts; a priest received the young woman's
confession and performed the last rites; the doctor plied his patient with drugs, fomentations,
and stimulants; father, mother, and friends groaned, prayed, and tore their hair. All the time
the poor creature sank steadily, the color left her face, her breath grew labored, and as night
fell the doctor's warning was fulfilled,--she was dead.

In a single day the fame of this wonderful physician spread through all the city, and people
flocked to his lodging with money and diseases. He was dazzled at the prospect of riches. After
three or four years of this kind of thing, if the tax man did not hear too much of his success,
he could return to Spain and live in comfortable retirement. Alas! for human hopes, he returned
sooner than he had intended. A few days after the death of his first patient somebody asked
how he forecast her fate so exactly.

"It was easy enough,--she spat blood," he answered.

"Are you sure it was blood?"

"Certainly. It was red."

"Ah, señor, every one spits red in Manila."

"Bah!"

"Oh, it is true! Everybody chews the buyo leaf, which is like the betel of India, that you
have heard of, just as everybody smokes in Luzon. The juice of the buyo is red."

Then the doctor realized that he had killed his patient by making her believe she was doomed
to die, and with the earnings of his brief career in the Philippines he bought a passage back
to Spain in the same ship that had carried him to the East. So, if you hear that a person is
ill, but if your informant winks and says that he is spitting red, you may believe that the
invalid will be out after a good sleep and a little bromide.

The Widow Velarde's Husband

Enchanted Lake, near Los Baños, on the Pasig, fills an ancient crater and is an object of natural
interest. Its enchantment, so far as is generally known, consists in the visits of Widow Velarde's
husband to its shores, and his occasional moonlight excursions over its waters in a boat that
has the same pale green shine as himself. This Velarde was a fisherman and being somewhat of
a gallant he had roused the mortal jealousy of his wife. In revenge for his supposed slights
she engaged two of his friends to confer on her the joys of widowhood, which they agreed to
do for a consideration. The amount promised was six dollars, but the preliminary negotiations
appear to have been hasty, for when these worthies had earned the money, having held the unfortunate
Velarde under the water until he ceased to bubble, the thrifty woman wanted them to accept
three dollars apiece. They held stoutly for six dollars apiece. The widow would not pay it.
There was a long and undignified wrangle,--disputes over funeral bills are often warranted,
but are seldom seemly,--and it ended in the angry departure of the fishermen, without even
their three dollars, to lodge a complaint against the Widow Velarde for cheating.

Now, would you suppose that two men, having just murdered a fellow-creature, would go to a
magistrate to complain about the payment? These Filipinos did it. They went to a judge at Los
Baños and tried to get an order for the woman's arrest. The judge, fancying this must be a
kind of joke peculiar to Luzon, said he would think over the matter, and he resumed his slumbers.
In a day or two he learned that the men had really killed their companion, and had fallen out
with the widow on the matter of terms. They meanwhile had learned that their act was contrary
to white man's law and had escaped, though it is said they were afterward caught and put to
death. Perhaps it is the disquiet caused by the reflection that he was worth no more than six
dollars that leads the extinguished husband to vex the scene of his demise.

The Grateful Bandits

Monsieur de la Gironiere, a French planter and trader, who visited the Philippines a lifetime
ago, or more, told stories of the islands and their people that are taken in these days with
a lump of salt. Among these narrations is one pertaining to the bandits who in the first years
of the nineteenth century were numerous and troublesome on several of the islands, and who
were alternately harassed and befriended by the officials,--chased when they had money and
well treated when they had parted with most of it to cool the sweating palms of authority.
Gironiere was visiting the cascades of Yang Yang when he found himself surrounded by brigands
who were chattering volubly and pointing to his horses. They did not at first offer violence,
but presently he understood that soldiers were in chase of them, and they were considering
whether it would not be wise to kill the horses, lest the troop, on its arrival, should seize
them to aid in the pursuit.

Gironiere could not afford horses often. He eagerly assured the thieves that he would not give
his nags to the military; that he would, on the contrary, depart by the road over which he
had come, in order to avoid meeting the soldiers, and this promise he made on the honor of
a gentleman. The leader of the brigands saluted, and the Frenchman drove away, as he had agreed,
the thieves watching him until he was out of sight. For months after this incident he had no
trouble with the natives. His household goods, his garden products, his poultry were spared.
Some years later, when he had definitely cast his fortunes with the Spaniards, he accepted
a commission as captain of the horse guards at Laguna, and it then became his duty to trouble
the very robbers who once had spared him. Their fighting was usually open, and, as the marksmanship
on both sides was the very worst, it was seldom that anybody was hurt. Truces were made, as
in honorable war, and the leaders corresponded with one another as to terms of battle or surrender.
One unofficial document received by Gironiere cautioned him to look out for himself, as there
was one in the bandit ranks who was ungrateful. Papias obviously has before him some other Gospel
narrative or narratives, which contained sayings or doings of Christ not recorded by St Mark,
and moreover related those which he did record in a different order. For this discrepancy
he desires to account. Tumbaga will shoot you from hiding."

Gironiere was a crafty person, likewise a cautious one. He knew where to send an answer to
this epistle, and he sent it: "You are brave men, and I thank you. I do not fear Tumbaga, for
he is a coward. How can you keep among you a man who would shoot another in the back?" Just
look at that for slyness! And the message had the effect he desired and expected. Some brave
bandit got behind a tree a couple of weeks afterward and shot a bullet through Tumbaga. Thus
was the power of the brigands weakened, the safety of Gironiere assured, and good feeling re-established
between the law and its habitual breakers.

                            THE END

By Charles M. Skinner

Myths and Legends of Our Own Land Illustrated. Two volumes in a box. 12mo. Buckram, $3.00;
half calf or half morocco, $6.00

Myths and Legends Beyond Our Borders Illustrated. 12mo. Buckram, $1.50; half calf or half morocco,
$3.00

Myths and Legends of Our New Possessions and Protectorate. Two volumes in a box. Buckram, $3.00;
half calf or half morocco, $6.00

With Feet to the Earth

New Edition, Enlarged

Illustrated. 12mo. Cloth, ornamental, $1.50

Do-Nothing Days

Illustrated. 12mo. Cloth, ornamental, $1.50

Flowers in the Pave

Illustrated. 12mo. Cloth, ornamental, $1.50