SIR HUMPHREY GILBERT'S VOYAGE TO NEWFOUNDLAND

By Edward Hayes

     PREPARER'S NOTE

     This text is one of the items included in Voyages and Travels:
     Ancient and Modern and was prepared from a 1910 edition,
     published by P F Collier & Son Company, New York.

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Sir Humphrey Gilbert, the founder of the first English colony in North America, was born about
1539, the son of a Devonshire gentleman, whose widow afterward married the father of Sir Walter
Raleigh. He was educated at Eton and Oxford, served under Sir Philip Sidney's father in Ireland,
and fought for the Netherlands against Spain. After his return he composed a pamphlet urging
the search for a northwest passage to Cathay, which led to Frobisher's license for his explorations
to that end.

In 1578 Gilbert obtained from Queen Elizabeth the charter he had long sought, to plant a colony
in North America. His first attempt failed, and cost him his whole fortune; but, after further
service in Ireland, he sailed again in 1583 for Newfoundland. In the August of that year he
took possession of the harbor of St. John and founded his colony, but on the return voyage
he went down with his ship in a storm south of the Azores.

The following narrative is an account of this last voyage of Gilbert's, told by Edward Hayes,
commander of "The Golden Hind," the only one to reach England of the three ships which set
out from Newfoundland with Gilbert.

The settlement at St. John was viewed by its promoter as merely the beginning of a scheme for
ousting Spain from America in favor of England. The plan did not progress as he hoped; but
after long delays, and under far other impulses than Gilbert ever thought of, much of his dream
was realized. Written by Mr. Edward Hayes, gentleman, and principal actor in the same voyage,[*]
who alone continued unto the end, and, by God's special assistance, returned home with his
retinue safe and entire.

     [*] Hayes was captain and owner of the Golden Hind,
     Gilbert's Rear-Admiral.

Many voyages have been pretended, yet hitherto never any thoroughly accomplished by our nation,
of exact discovery into the bowels of those main, ample, and vast countries extended infinitely
into the north from thirty degrees, or rather from twenty-five degrees, of septentrional latitude,
neither hath a right way been taken of planting a Christian habitation and regiment (government)
upon the same, as well may appear both by the little we yet do actually possess therein, and
by our ignorance of the riches and secrets within those lands, which unto this day we know
chiefly by the travel and report of other nations, and most of the French, who albeit they
cannot challenge such right and interest unto the said countries as we, neither these many
years have had opportunity nor means so great to discover and to plant, being vexed with the
calamities of intestine wars, as we have had by the inestimable benefit of our long and happy
peace, yet have they both ways performed more, and had long since attained a sure possession
and settled government of many provinces in those northerly parts of America, if their many
attempts into those foreign and remote lands had not been impeached by their garboils at home.

The first discovery of these coasts, never heard of before, was well begun by John Cabot the
father and Sebastian his son, an Englishman born, who were the first finders out of all that
great tract of land stretching from the Cape of Florida, into those islands which we now call
the Newfoundland; all which they brought and annexed unto the crown of England. Since when,
if with like diligence the search of inland countries had been followed, as the discovery upon
the coast and outparts thereof was performed by those two men, no doubt her Majesty's territories
and revenue had been mightily enlarged and advanced by this day; and, which is more, the seed
of Christian religion had been sowed amongst those pagans, which by this time might have brought
forth a most plentiful harvest and copious congregation of Christians; which must be the chief
intent of such as shall make any attempt that way; or else whatsoever is builded upon other
foundation shall never obtain happy success nor continuance. But most assuredly, the only cause
of religion hitherto hath kept back, and will also bring forward at the time assigned by God,
an effectual and complete discovery and possession by Christians both of those ample countries
and the riches within them hitherto concealed; whereof, notwithstanding, God in His wisdom
hath permitted to be revealed from time to time a certain obscure and misty knowledge, by little
and little to allure the minds of men that way, which else will be dull enough in the zeal
of His cause, and thereby to prepare us unto a readiness for the execution of His will, against
the due time ordained of calling those pagans unto Christianity.

In the meanwhile it behoveth every man of great calling, in whom is any instinct of inclination
unto this attempt, to examine his own motions, which, if the same proceed of ambition or avarice,
he may assure himself it cometh not of God, and therefore cannot have confidence of God's protection
and assistance against the violence (else irresistible) both of sea and infinite perils upon
the land; whom God yet may use as an instrument to further His cause and glory some way, but
not to build upon so bad a foundation. For not long after that Christopher Columbus had discovered
the islands and continent of the West Indies for Spain, John and Sebastian Cabot made discovery
also of the rest from Florida northwards to the behoof of England.

And whensoever afterwards the Spaniards, very prosperous in all their southern discoveries,
did attempt anything into Florida and those regions inclining towards the north, they proved
most unhappy, and were at length discouraged utterly by the hard and lamentable success of
many both religious and valiant in arms, endeavouring to bring those northerly regions also
under the Spanish jurisdiction, as if God had prescribed limits unto the Spanish nation which
they might not exceed; as by their own gests recorded may be aptly gathered.

The French, as they can pretend less title unto these northern parts than the Spaniard, by
how much the Spaniard made the first discovery of the same continent so far northward as unto
Florida, and the French did but review that before discovered by the English nation, usurping
upon our right, and imposing names upon countries, rivers, bays, capes, or headlands as if
they had been the first finders of those coasts; which injury we offered not unto the Spaniards,
but left off to discover when we approached the Spanish limits; even so God hath not hitherto
permitted them to establish a possession permanent upon another's right, notwithstanding their
manifold attempts, in which the issue hath been no less tragical than that of the Spaniards,
as by their own reports is extant. Which also is very probable by the revolution and course
of God's word and religion, which from the beginning hath moved from the east towards, and
at last unto, the west, where it is like to end, unless the same begin again where it did in
the east, which were to expect a like world again. But we are assured of the contrary by the
prophecy of Christ, whereby we gather that after His word preached throughout the world shall
be the end. And as the Gospel when it descended westward began in the south, and afterward
begun in the south countries of America, no less hope may be gathered that it will also spread
into the north. Whereby nevertheless, lest any man should be dismayed by example of other folks'
calamity, and misdeem that God doth resist all attempts intended that way, I thought good,
so far as myself was an eye-witness, to deliver the circumstance and manner of our proceedings
in that action; in which the gentleman was so unfortunately encumbered with wants, and worse
matched with many ill-disposed people, that his rare judgment and regiment premeditated for
those affairs was subjected to tolerate abuses, and in sundry extremities to hold on a course
more to uphold credit than likely in his own conceit happily to succeed. An action doubtless
not to be intermeddled with base purposes, as many have made the same but a colour to shadow
actions otherwise scarce justifiable; which doth excite God's heavy judgments in the end, to
the terrifying of weak minds from the cause, without pondering His just proceedings; and doth
also incense foreign princes against our attempts, how just soever, who cannot but deem the
sequel very dangerous unto their state (if in those parts we should grow to strength), seeing
the very beginnings are entered with spoil.

When first Sir Humfrey Gilbert undertook the western discovery of America, and had procured
from her Majesty a very large commission to inhabit and possess at his choice all remote and
heathen lands not in the actual possession of any Christian prince, the same commission exemplified
with many privileges, such as in his discretion he might demand, very many gentlemen of good
estimation drew unto him, to associate him in so commendable an enterprise, so that the preparation
was expected to grow unto a puissant fleet, able to encounter a king's power by sea. Nevertheless,
amongst a multitude of voluntary men, their dispositions were diverse, which bred a jar, and
made a division in the end, to the confusion of that attempt even before the same was begun.

Having buried, only in a preparation, a great mass of substance, whereby his estate was impaired,
his mind yet not dismayed, he continued his former designment, and purposed to revive this
enterprise, good occasion serving. Upon which determination standing long without means to
satisfy his desire, at last he granted certain assignments out of his commission to sundry
persons of mean ability, desiring the privilege of his grant, to plant and fortify in the north
parts of America about the river of Canada; to whom if God gave good success in the north parts
(where then no matter of moment was expected), the same, he thought, would greatly advance
the hope of the south, and be a furtherance unto his determination that way. And the worst
that might happen in that course might be excused, without prejudice unto him, by the former
supposition that those north regions were of no regard.

Time went away without anything done by his assigns; insomuch that at last he must resolve
himself to take a voyage in person, for more assurance to keep his patent in force, which then
almost was expired or within two years. In furtherance of his determination, amongst others,
Sir George Peckham, Knight, shewed himself very zealous to the action, greatly aiding him both
by his advice and in the charge. Other gentlemen to their ability joined unto him, resolving
to adventure their substance and lives in the same cause. Such were the difficulties and cross
accidents opposing these proceedings, which took not end in less than two years; many of which
circumstances I will omit.

The last place of our assembly, before we left the coast of England, was in Cawset Bay, near
unto Plymouth, then resolved to put unto the sea with shipping and provision such as we had,
before our store yet remaining, but chiefly the time and season of the year, were too far spent.
Nevertheless, it seemed first very doubtful by what way to shape our course, and to begin our
intended discovery, either from the south northward or from the north southward. The first,
that is, beginning south, without all controversy was the likeliest, wherein we were assured
to have commodity of the current which from the Cape of Florida setteth northward, and would
have furthered greatly our navigation, discovering from the foresaid cape along towards Cape
Breton, and all those lands lying to the north. Where being usually at that time of the year,
and until the fine of August, a multitude of ships repairing thither for fish, we should be
relieved abundantly with many necessaries, which, after the fishing ended, they might well
spare and freely impart unto us. Not staying long upon that Newland coast, we might proceed
southward, and follow still the sun, until we arrived at places more temperate to our content.

By which reasons we were the rather induced to follow this northerly course, obeying unto necessity,
which must be supplied. Immediately we agreed upon the manner of our course and orders to be
observed in our voyage; which were delivered in writing, unto the captains and masters of every
ship a copy, in manner following.

Every ship had delivered two bullets or scrolls, the one sealed up in wax, the other left open;
in both which were included several watchwords. That open, serving upon our own coast or the
coast of Ireland; the other sealed, was promised on all hands not to be broken up until we
should be clear of the Irish coast; which from thenceforth did serve until we arrived and met
all together in such harbours of the Newfoundland as were agreed for our rendezvous. The said
watchwords being requisite to know our consorts whensoever by night, either by fortune of weather,
our fleet dispersed should come together again; or one should hail another; or if by ill watch
and steerage one ship should chance to fall aboard of another in the dark.

The reason of the bullet sealed was to keep secret that watchword while we were upon our own
coast, lest any of the company stealing from the fleet might bewray the same; which known to
an enemy, he might board us by night without mistrust, having our own watchword.

Orders agreed upon by the Captains and Masters to be observed by the fleet of Sir Humfrey Gilbert. 

Each, clinging to the bars of his cell, each, trembling with a fearful
joy, each, his thumbs up, urging on with all the strength of his will
the hunted, rat-like figure that stumbled panting through the crisp
October night, bewildered by strange lights, beset by shadows, staggering
and falling, running like a mad dog in circles, knowing that wherever
his feet led him the siren still held him by the heels.

As a rule, when Winnie Keep was dressing for dinner, Fred, in the room adjoining, could hear her
unconsciously and light-heartedly singing to herself.

It was a habit of hers that he loved.

But on this night, although her room was directly above where he sat upon the terrace, he
heard no singing. He had been on the terrace for a quarter of an hour. Gridley, the aged butler
who was rented with the house, and who for twenty years had been an inmate of it, had brought the
cocktail and taken away the empty glass. And Keep had been alone with his thoughts. They were
entirely of the convict.

If the man suddenly confronted him and begged his aid, what would he do? He knew quite well
what he would do.

He considered even the means by which he would assist the fugitive to a successful get-away.

The ethics of the question did not concern Fred. He did not weigh his duty to the State of New
York, or to society. One day, when he had visited "the institution," as a somewhat sensitive neighborhood
prefers to speak of it, he was told that the chance of a prisoner's escaping from Sing Sing
and not being at once retaken was one out of six thousand.

So with Fred it was largely a sporting proposition. Any man who could beat a six-thousand-to-one
shot commanded his admiration.

And, having settled his own course of action, he tried to imagine
himself in the place of the man who at that very moment was endeavoring
to escape.

Were he that man, he would first, he decided, rid himself of his
tell-tale clothing.

But that would leave him naked, and in Westchester County a naked man would be quite as conspicuous
as one in the purple-gray cloth of the prison. How could he obtain clothes? He might hold up
a passer-by, and, if the passer-by did not flee from him or punch him into insensibility, he might
effect an exchange of garments; he might by threats obtain them from some farmer; he might despoil
a scarecrow.

But with none of these plans was Fred entirely satisfied.

The question deeply perplexed him.

How best could a naked man clothe himself? And as he sat pondering that point, from the bushes
a naked man emerged. He was not entirely undraped. For around his nakedness he had drawn a canvas
awning. Fred recognized it as having been torn from one of the row-boats in the lake. But,
except for that, the man was naked to his heels. He was a young man of Fred's own age. His hair
was cut close, his face smooth-shaven, and above his eye was a half-healed bruise. He had the
sharp, clever, rat-like face of one who lived by evil knowledge. Water dripped from him, and
either for that reason or from fright the young man trembled, and, like one who had been running,
breathed in short, hard gasps.

Fred was surprised to find that he was not in the least surprised. It was as though he had been
waiting for the man, as though it had been an appointment.

Two thoughts alone concerned him: that before he could rid himself
of his visitor his wife might return and take alarm, and that the
man, not knowing his friendly intentions, and in a state to commit
murder, might rush him.

But the stranger made no hostile move, and for a moment in the moonlight the two young men eyed
each other warily.

Then, taking breath and with a violent effort to stop the chattering of his teeth, the stranger launched
into his story.

"I took a bath in your pond," he blurted forth, "and--and they stole my clothes! That's why
I'm like this!"

Fred was consumed with envy. In comparison with this ingenious narrative how prosaic and commonplace
became his own plans to rid himself of accusing garments and explain his nakedness. He regarded
the stranger with admiration.

But even though he applauded the other's invention, he could not let him suppose that he was
deceived by it.
"Isn't it rather a cold night to take a bath?" he said.

As though
in hearty agreement, the naked man burst into a violent fit of shivering.

"It
wasn't a bath," he gasped. "It was a bet!"

"A what!" exclaimed Fred.
His admiration was increasing. "A bet? Then you are not alone?"

"I
am NOW--damn them!" exclaimed the naked one. He began again reluctantly.
"We saw you from the road, you and a woman, sitting here in the light
from that room. They bet me I didn't dare strip and swim across your
pond with you sitting so near. I can see now it was framed up on me
from the start. Thursday following, when we hailed one another in the evening,
according to the order before specified, they signified unto us out of the Vice-Admiral, that
both the captain, and very many of the men, were fallen sick. And about midnight the Vice-Admiral
forsook us, notwithstanding we had the wind east, fair and good. But it was after credibly
reported that they were infected with a contagious sickness, and arrived greatly distressed
at Plymouth; the reason I could never understand. Sure I am, no cost was spared by their owner,
Master Raleigh, in setting them forth; therefore I leave it unto God. By this time we were
in 48 degrees of latitude, not a little grieved with the loss of the most puissant ship in
our fleet; after whose departure the Golden Hind succeeded in the place of Vice-Admiral, and
removed her flag from the mizen into the foretop. From Saturday, the 15 of June, until the
28, which was upon a Friday, we never had fair day without fog or rain, and winds bad, much
to the west-north-west, whereby we were driven southward unto 41 degrees scarce. We had wind
always so scant from the west-north-west, and from west-south-west again, that our traverse
was great, running south unto 41 degrees almost, and afterwards north into 51 degrees. Also
we were encumbered with much fog and mists in manner palpable, in which we could not keep so
well together, but were discovered, losing the company of the Swallow and the Squirrel upon
the 20 day of July, whom we met again at several places upon the Newfoundland coast the 3 of
August, as shall be declared in place convenient. Saturday, the 27 July, we might descry, not
far from us, as it were mountains of ice driven upon the sea, being then in 50 degrees, which
were carried southward to the weather of us; whereby may be conjectured that some current doth
set that way from the north. The breadth of this bank is somewhere more, and somewhere less;
but we found the same about ten leagues over, having sounded both on this side thereof, and
the other toward Newfoundland, but found no ground with almost 200 fathom of line, both before
and after we had passed the bank. The Portugals, and French chiefly, have a notable trade of
fishing upon this bank, where are sometimes an hundred or more sails of ships, who commonly
begin the fishing in April, and have ended by July. That fish is large, always wet, having
no land near to dry, and is called cod fish. During the time of fishing, a man shall know without
sounding when he is upon the bank, by the incredible multitude of sea-fowl hovering over the
same, to prey upon the offals and garbage of fish thrown out by fishermen, and floating upon
the sea.

Upon Tuesday, the 11 of June we forsook the coast of England. So again on Tuesday, the 30 of
July, seven weeks after, we got sight of land, being immediately embayed in the Grand Bay,
or some other great bay; the certainty whereof we could not judge, so great haze and fog did
hang upon the coast, as neither we might discern the land well, nor take the sun's height.
But by our best computation we were then in the 51 degrees of latitude. Forsaking this bay
and uncomfortable coast (nothing appearing unto us but hideous rocks and mountains, bare of
trees, and void of any green herb) we followed the coast to the south, with weather fair and
clear. We had sight of an island named Penguin, of a fowl there breeding in abundance almost
incredible, which cannot fly, their wings not able to carry their body, being very large (not
much less than a goose) and exceeding fat, which the Frenchmen use to take without difficulty
upon that island, and to barrel them up with salt. But for lingering of time, we had made us
there the like provision. The captain, albeit himself was very honest and religious, yet was
he not appointed of men to his humour and desert; who for the most part were such as had been
by us surprised upon the narrow seas of England, being pirates, and had taken at that instant
certain Frenchmen laden, one bark with wines, and another with salt. Both which we rescued,
and took the man-of-war with all her men, which was the same ship now called the Swallow; following
still their kind so oft as, being separated from the General, they found opportunity to rob
and spoil. And because God's justice did follow the same company, even to destruction, and
to the overthrow also of the captain (though not consenting to their misdemeanour) I will not
conceal anything that maketh to the manifestation and approbation of His judgments, for examples
of others; persuaded that God more sharply took revenge upon them, and hath tolerated longer
as great outrage in others, by how much these went under protection of His cause and religion,
which was then pretended.

Therefore upon further enquiry it was known how this company met with a bark returning home
after the fishing with his freight; and because the men in the Swallow were very near scanted
of victuals, and chiefly of apparel, doubtful withal where or when to find and meet with their
Admiral, they besought the captain that they might go aboard this Newlander, only to borrow
what might be spared, the rather because the same was bound homeward. What became afterwards
of the poor Newlander, perhaps destitute of sails and furniture sufficient to carry them home,
whither they had not less to run than 700 leagues, God alone knoweth; who took vengeance not
long after of the rest that escaped at this instant, to reveal the fact, and justify to the
world God's judgments indicted upon them, as shall be declared in place convenient.

Thus after we had met with the Swallow, we held on our course southward, until we came against
the harbour called St. John, about five leagues from the former Cape of St. Francis, where
before the entrance into the harbour, we found also the frigate or Squirrel lying at anchor;
whom the English merchants, that were and always be Admirals by turns interchangeably over
the fleets of fishermen within the same harbour, would not permit to enter into the harbour.
Glad of so happy meeting, both of the Swallow and frigate in one day, being Saturday, the third
of August, we made ready our fights, and prepared to enter the harbour, any resistance to the
contrary notwithstanding, there being within of all nations to the number of 36 sails. But
first the General despatched a boat to give them knowledge of his coming for no ill intent,
having commission from her Majesty for his voyage he had in hand; and immediately we followed
with a slack gale, and in the very entrance, which is but narrow, not above two butts' length,
the Admiral fell upon a rock on the larboard side by great oversight, in that the weather was
fair, the rock much above water fast by the shore, where neither went any sea-gate. But we
found such readiness in the English merchants to help us in that danger, that without delay
there were brought a number of boats, which towed off the ship, and cleared her of danger.

Having taken place convenient in the road, we let fall anchors, the captains and masters repairing
aboard our Admiral; whither also came immediately the masters and owners of the fishing fleet
of Englishmen, to understand the General's intent and cause of our arrival there. They were
all satisfied when the General had shewed his commission and purpose to take possession of
those lands to the behalf of the crown of England, and the advancement of the Christian religion
in those paganish regions, requiring but their lawful aid for repairing of his fleet, and supply
of some necessaries, so far as conveniently might be afforded him, both out of that and other
harbours adjoining. In lieu whereof he made offer to gratify them with any favour and privilege,
which upon their better advice they should demand, the like being not to be obtained hereafter
for greater price. So craving expedition of his demand, minding to proceed further south without
long detention in those parts, he dismissed them, after promise given of their best endeavour
to satisfy speedily his so reasonable request. The merchants with their masters departed, they
caused forthwith to be discharged all the great ordnance of their fleet in token of our welcome.

It was further determined that every ship of our fleet should deliver unto the merchants and
masters of that harbour a note of all their wants: which done, the ships, as well English as
strangers, were taxed at an easy rate to make supply. And besides, commissioners were appointed,
part of our own company and part of theirs, to go into other harbours adjoining (for our English
merchants command all there) to levy our provision: whereunto the Portugals, above other nations,
did most willingly and liberally contribute. Moreover as the manner is in their fishing, every
week to choose their Admiral anew, or rather they succeed in orderly course, and have weekly
their Admiral's feast solemnized: even so the General, captains, and masters of our fleet were
continually invited and feasted. To grow short in our abundance at home the entertainment had
been delightful; but after our wants and tedious passage through the ocean, it seemed more
acceptable and of greater contentation, by how much the same was unexpected in that desolate
corner of the world; where, at other times of the year, wild beasts and birds have only the
fruition of all those countries, which now seemed a place very populous and much frequented.

The next morning being Sunday, and the fourth of August, the General and his company were brought
on land by English merchants, who shewed unto us their accustomed walks unto a place they call
the Garden. But nothing appeared more than nature itself without art: who confusedly hath brought
forth roses abundantly, wild, but odoriferous, and to sense very comfortable. Also the like
plenty of raspberries, which do grow in every place. And especially at the same time for a
beginning, he proposed and delivered three laws to be in force immediately. That is to say
the first for religion, which in public exercise should be according to the Church of England.
The second, for maintenance of her Majesty's right and possession of those territories, against
which if any thing were attempted prejudicial, the party or parties offending should be adjudged
and executed as in case of high treason, according to the laws of England.

These contents published, obedience was promised by general voice and consent of the multitude,
as well of Englishmen as strangers, praying for continuance of this possession and government
begun; after this, the assembly was dismissed. And afterwards were erected not far from that
place the arms of England engraven in lead, and infixed upon a pillar of wood. Yet further
and actually to establish this possession taken in the right of her Majesty, and to the behoof
of Sir Humfrey Gilbert, knight, his heirs and assigns for ever, the General granted in fee-farm
divers parcels of land lying by the water-side, both in this harbour of St. John, and elsewhere,
which was to the owners a great commodity, being thereby assured, by their proper inheritance,
of grounds convenient to dress and to dry their fish; whereof many times before they did fail,
being prevented by them that came first into the harbour. For which grounds they did covenant
to pay a certain rent and service unto Sir Humfrey Gilbert, his heirs or assigns for ever,
and yearly to maintain possession of the same, by themselves or their assigns.

Now remained only to take in provision granted, according as every ship was taxed, which did
fish upon the coast adjoining. In the meanwhile, the General appointed men unto their charge:
some to repair and trim the ships, others to attend in gathering together our supply and provisions:
others to search the commodities and singularities of the country, to be found by sea or land,
and to make relation unto the General what either themselves could know by their own travail
and experience, or by good intelligence of Englishmen or strangers, who had longest frequented
the same coast. Also some observed the elevation of the pole, and drew plots of the country
exactly graded. And by that I could gather by each man's several relation, I have drawn a brief
description of the Newfoundland, with the commodities by sea or land already made, and such
also as are in possibility and great likelihood to be made. Nevertheless the cards and plots
that were drawn, with the due gradation of the harbours, bays, and capes, did perish with the
Admiral: wherefore in the description following, I must omit the particulars of such things.
The land round about hath very many goodly bays and harbours, safe roads for ships, the like
not to be found in any part of the known world. Some hold opinion that the Newfoundland might
be the more subject to cold, by how much it lieth high and near unto the middle region. I grant
that not in Newfoundland alone, but in Germany, Italy and Afric, even under the equinoctial
line, the mountains are extreme cold, and seldom uncovered of snow, in their culm and highest
tops, which cometh to pass by the same reason that they are extended towards the middle region:
yet in the countries lying beneath them, it is found quite contrary. Whereas, on the contrary,
he passeth from Europe and Afric unto American over the ocean, from whence he draweth and carrieth
with him abundance of moist vapours, which do qualify and enfeeble greatly the sun's reverberation
upon this country chiefly of Newfoundland, being so much to the northward. Nevertheless, as
I said before, the cold cannot be so intolerable under the latitude of 46, 47, and 48, especial
within land, that it should be unhabitable, as some do suppose, seeing also there are very
many people more to the north by a great deal. And in these south parts there be certain beasts,
ounces or leopards, and birds in like manner, which in the summer we have seen, not heard of
in countries of extreme and vehement coldness.

Concerning the inland commodities, as well to be drawn from this land, as from the exceeding
large countries adjoining, there is nothing which our east and northerly countries of Europe
do yield, but the like also may be made in them as plentifully, by time and industry; namely,
resin, pitch, tar, soap-ashes, deal-board, masts for ships, hides, furs, flax, hemp, corn,
cables, cordage, linen cloth, metals, and many more. All which the countries will afford, and
the soil is apt to yield. The trees for the most in those south parts are fir-trees, pine,
and cypress, all yielding gum and turpentine. Cherry trees bearing fruit no bigger than a small
pease. Also pear-trees, but fruitless. Other trees of some sort to us unknown. The soil along
the coast is not deep of earth, bringing forth abundantly peasen small, yet good feeding for
cattle. Roses passing sweet, like unto our musk roses in form; raspises; a berry which we call
whorts, good and wholesome to eat. The grass and herb doth fat sheep in very short space, proved
by English merchants which have carried sheep thither for fresh victual and had them raised
exceeding fat in less than three weeks. Peasen which our countrymen have sown in the time of
May, have come up fair, and been gathered in the beginning of August, of which our General
had a present acceptable for the rareness, being the first fruits coming up by art and industry
in that desolate and dishabited land. Lakes or pools of fresh water, both on the tops of mountains
and in the valleys; in which are said to be muscles not unlike to have pearl, which I had put
in trial, if by mischance falling unto me I had not been letted from that and other good experiments
I was minded to make. Fowl both of water and land in great plenty and diversity. All kind of
green fowl; others as big as bustards, yet not the same. A great white fowl called of some
a gaunt. Upon the land divers sort of hawks, as falcons, and others by report. Partridges most
plentiful, larger than ours, grey and white of colour, and rough-footed like doves, which our
men after one flight did kill with cudgels, they were so fat and unable to fly. Bears, ounces
or leopards, some greater and some lesser; wolves, foxes, which to the northward a little farther
are black, whose fur is esteemed in some countries of Europe very rich. Otters, beavers, marterns;
and in the opinion of most men that saw it, the General had brought unto him a sable alive,
which he sent unto his brother, Sir John Gilbert, Knight, of Devonshire, but it was never delivered,
as after I understood. For besides these already recounted and infinite more, the mountains
generally make shew of mineral substance; iron very common, lead, and somewhere copper. I will
not aver of richer metals; albeit by the circumstances following, more than hope may be conceived
thereof.

For amongst other charges given to enquire out the singularities of this country, the General
was most curious in the search of metals, commanding the mineral-man and refiner especially
to be diligent. The next time he found ore, which with no small show of contentment he delivered
unto the General, using protestation that if silver were the thing which might satisfy the
General and his followers, there it was, advising him to seek no further; the peril whereof
he undertook upon his life (as dear unto him as the crown of England unto her Majesty, that
I may use his own words) if it fell not out accordingly.

Myself at this instant liker to die than to live, by a mischance, could not follow this confident
opinion of our refiner to my own satisfaction; but afterward demanding our General's opinion
therein, and to have some part of the ore, he replied, Content yourself, I have seen enough;
and were it but to satisfy my private humour, I would proceed no further. The promise unto
my friends, and necessity to bring also the south countries within compass of my patent near
expired, as we have already done these north parts, do only persuade me further. And touching
the ore, I have sent it aboard, whereof I would have no speech to be made so long as we remain
within harbour; here being both Portugals, Biscayans, and Frenchmen, not far off, from whom
must be kept any bruit or muttering of such matter. When we are at sea, proof shall be made;
if it be our desire, we may return the sooner hither again. Whose answer I judged reasonable,
and contenting me well; wherewith I will conclude this narration and description of the Newfoundland,
and proceed to the rest of our voyage, which ended tragically.

While the better sort of us were seriously occupied in repairing our wants, and contriving
of matters for the commodity of our voyage, others of another sort and disposition were plotting
of mischief; some casting to steal away our shipping by night, watching opportunity by the
General's and captains' lying on the shore; whose conspiracies discovered, they were prevented.
Others drew together in company, and carried away out of the harbours adjoining a ship laden
with fish, setting the poor men on shore. A great many more of our people stole into the woods
to hide themselves, attending time and means to return home by such shipping as daily departed
from the coast. Some were sick of fluxes, and many dead; and in brief, by one means or other
our company was diminished, and many by the General licensed to return home. Insomuch as after
we had reviewed our people, resolved to see an end of our voyage, we grew scant of men to furnish
all our shipping; it seemed good thereof unto the General to leave the Swallow with such provision
as might be spared for transporting home the sick people.

The captain of the Delight or Admiral, returned into England, in whose stead was appointed
captain Maurice Browne, before the captain of the Swallow; who also brought with him into the
Delight all his men of the Swallow, which before have been noted of outrage perpetrated and
committed upon fishermen there met at sea.

The General made choice to go in his frigate the Squirrel, whereof the captain also was amongst
them that returned into England; the same frigate being most convenient to discover upon the
coast, and to search into every harbour or creek, which a great ship could not do. Therefore
the frigate was prepared with her nettings and fights, and overcharged with bases and such
small ordnance, more to give a show, than with judgment to foresee unto the safety of her and
the men, which afterward was an occasion also of their overthrow.

Now having made ready our shipping, that is to say, the Delight, the Golden Hind, and the Squirrel,
we put aboard our provision, which was wines, bread or rusk, fish wet and dry, sweet oils,
besides many other, as marmalades, figs, limons barrelled, and such like. Also we had other
necessary provision for trimming our ships, nets and lines to fish withal, boats or pinnaces
fit for discovery. In brief, we were supplied of our wants commodiously, as if we had been
in a country or some city populous and plentiful of all things. It is in latitude 46 degrees
25 minutes. Under this cape we were becalmed a small time, during which we laid out hooks and
lines to take cod, and drew in less than two hours fish so large and in such abundance, that
many days after we fed upon no other provision. From hence we shaped our course unto the island
of Sablon, if conveniently it would so fall out, also directly to Cape Breton.

Sablon lieth to the seaward of Cape Breton about 25 leagues, whither we were determined to
go upon intelligence we had of a Portugal, during our abode in St. John's, who was himself
present when the Portugals, above thirty years past, did put into the same island both neat
and swine to breed, which were since exceedingly multiplied. This seemed unto us very happy
tidings, to have in an island lying so near unto the main, which we intended to plant upon,
such store of cattle, whereby we might at all times conveniently be relieved of victual, and
served of store for breed.

In this course we trended along the coast, which from Cape Race stretcheth into the north-west,
making a bay which some called Trepassa. We sent men on land to take view of the soil along
this coast, whereof they made good report, and some of them had will to be planted there. They
saw pease growing in great abundance everywhere.

The distance between Cape Race and Cape Breton is 87 leagues; in which navigation we spent
eight days, having many times the wind indifferent good, yet could we never attain sight of
any land all that time, seeing we were hindered by the current. At last we fell into such flats
and dangers that hardly any of us escaped; where nevertheless we lost our Admiral (the Delight)
with all the men and provisions, not knowing certainly the place. Our course we held in clearing
us of these flats was east-south-east, and south-east, and south, fourteen leagues, with a
marvellous scant wind.

Upon Tuesday, the 27 of August, toward the evening, our General caused them in his frigate
to sound, who found white sand at 35 fathom, being then in latitude about 44 degrees. Wednesday,
toward night, the wind came south, and we bare with the land all that night, west-north-west,
contrary to the mind of Master Cox; nevertheless we followed the Admiral, deprived of power
to prevent a mischief, which by no contradiction could be brought to hold another course, alleging
they could not make the ship to work better, nor to lie otherways. Towards the evening also
we caught in the Golden Hind a very mighty porpoise with harping iron, having first stricken
divers of them, and brought away part of their flesh sticking upon the iron, but could recover
only that one. These also, passing through the ocean in herds, did portend storm. The faithful
and sorely tried domestics fled toward the door. "And what's more," Anita hurled after them, "get
your bets down quick, for after I meet him the odds will be a hundred to one!"

Had the REPUBLIC been an afternoon paper, Sam might have been at the office and might have
gone to the telephone, and things might have happened differently;
but, as the REPUBLIC was a morning paper, the only person in the office
was the lady who scrubbed the floors and she refused to go near the
telephone.

So Anita Flagg said, "I'll call him up later," and went happily on her ride, with her heart
warm with love for all the beautiful world; but later it was too late.

To keep himself fit, Sam Ward always walked to the office. On this particular morning Hollis Holworthy
was walking uptown and they met opposite the cathedral.

"You're the very man I want," said Hollworthy joyously--"you've got to decide a bet."

He turned and fell into step with Sam.

"It's one I made last night with Anita Flagg.

She thinks you didn't know who she was yesterday, and I said that was ridiculous. Of course you knew.
I bet her a theatre party."

To Sam it seemed hardly fair that so soon, before his fresh wound had even been dressed, it
should be torn open by impertinent fingers; but he had no right to take offense. How could
the man, or any one else, know what Sister Anne had meant to him?

"I'm
afraid you lose," he said. He halted to give Holworthy the hint to
leave him, but Holworthy had no such intention.

"You don't say so!"
exclaimed that young man. "Fancy one of you chaps being taken in like
that. I thought you were taking her in--getting up a story for the
Sunday supplement."

Sam shook his head, nodded, and again moved on;
but he was not yet to escape. "And, instead of your fooling her,"
exclaimed Holworthy incredulously, "she was having fun, with you!"

With
difficulty Sam smiled.

"So it would seem," he said.

"She certainly
made an awfully funny story of it!" exclaimed Holworthy admiringly. For when all hope was past of recovering
the ship, and that men began to give over, and to save themselves, the captain was advised
before to shift also for his life, by the pinnace at the stern of the ship; but refusing that
counsel, he would not give example with the first to leave the ship, but used all means to
exhort his people not to despair, nor so to leave off their labour, choosing rather to die
than to incur infamy by forsaking his charge, which then might be thought to have perished
through his default, showing an ill precedent unto his men, by leaving the ship first himself.
With this mind he mounted upon the highest deck, where he attended imminent death, and unavoidable;
how long, I leave it to God, who withdraweth not his comfort from his servants at such times.

In the mean season, certain, to the number of fourteen persons, leaped into a small pinnace,
the bigness of a Thames barge, which was made in the Newfoundland, cut off the rope wherewith
it was towed, and committed themselves to God's mercy, amidst the storm, and rage of sea and
winds, destitute of food, not so much as a drop of fresh water. The boat was carried before
the wind, continuing six days and nights in the ocean, and arrived at last with the men, alive,
but weak, upon the Newfoundland, saving that the foresaid Headly, who had been late sick, and
another called of us Brazil, of his travel into those countries, died by the way, famished,
and less able to hold out than those of better health. . . . Thus whom God delivered from drowning,
he appointed to be famished; who doth give limits to man's times, and ordaineth the manner
and circumstance of dying: whom, again, he will preserve, neither sea nor famine can confound.
For those that arrived upon the Newfoundland were brought into France by certain Frenchmen,
then being upon the coast. The ground coming upon our lead, being sometime cozy sand and other
while a broad shell, with a little sand about it.

Our people lost courage daily after this ill success, the weather continuing thick and blustering,
with increase of cold, winter drawing on, which took from them all hope of amendment, settling
an assurance of worse weather to grow upon us every day. The leeside of us lay full of flats
and dangers, inevitable if the wind blew hard at south. Some again doubted we were ingulfed
in the Bay of St. Lawrence, the coast full of dangers, and unto us unknown. But above all,
provision waxed scant, and hope of supply was gone with the loss of our Admiral. Those in the
frigate were already pinched with spare allowance, and want of clothes chiefly: thereupon they
besought the General to return to England before they all perished. And to them of the Golden
Hind they made signs of distress, pointing to their mouths, and to their clothes thin and ragged:
then immediately they also of the Golden Hind grew to be of the same opinion and desire to
return home. Omitting circumstance, how unwillingly the captain and master of the Hind condescended
to this motion, his own company can testify; yet comforted with the General's promise of a
speedy return at spring, and induced by other apparent reasons, proving an impossibility to
accomplish the action at that time, it was concluded on all hands to retire. The wind was large
for England at our return, but very high, and the sea rough, insomuch as the frigate, wherein
the General went, was almost swallowed up. 

"Have secured for you a thousand shares of each," he read, "at fifteen. Maddox."

Like a man awakening from a nightmare, Philip tried to separate the
horror of the situation from the cold fact. The cold fact was sufficiently
horrible. Which hindrance thitherward, and speed back again,
is to be imputed unto the swift current, as well as to the winds, which we had more large in
our return. This Monday the General came aboard the Hind, to have the surgeon of the Hind to
dress his foot, which he hurt by treading upon a nail: at which time we comforted each other
with hope of hard success to be all past, and of the good to come. So agreeing to carry out
lights always by night, that we might keep together, he departed into his frigate, being by
no means to be entreated to tarry in the Hind, which had been more for his security. Immediately
after followed a sharp storm, which we over passed for that time, praised be God.

The weather fair, the General came aboard the Hind again, to make merry together with the captain,
master, and company, which was the last meeting, and continued there from morning until night.
During which time there passed sundry discourses touching affairs past and to come, lamenting
greatly the loss of his great ship, more of the men, but most of all his books and notes, and
what else I know not, for which he was out of measure grieved, the same doubtless being some
matter of more importance than his books, which I could not draw from him: yet by circumstance
I gathered the same to be the ore which Daniel the Saxon had brought unto him in the Newfoundland. He
was always ready to speak, whatever the subject, but he showed no disposition to take all
the talk. There was no moment of pause in the flowing after-dinner discussions, for our host,
as well as several of his guests, was abundantly able to hold his own with this marvelous and
every way delightful talker--this prince in the domain of London social life.
There was some conversation about Nollekens the sculptor, whose inordinate
love of money was such a curious blemish in his character. After which time he could never conveniently
send again aboard the great ship, much less he doubted her ruin so near at hand.

Herein my opinion was better confirmed diversely, and by sundry conjectures, which maketh me
have the greater hope of this rich mine. Also laying down his determination in the spring following
for disposing of his voyage then to be re-attempted: he assigned the captain and master of
the Golden Hind unto the south discovery, and reserved unto himself the north, affirming that
this voyage had won his heart from the south, and that he was now become a northern man altogether.

Last, being demanded what means he had, at his arrival in England, to compass the charges of
so great preparation as he intended to make the next spring, having determined upon two fleets,
one for the south, another for the north; Leave that to me, he replied, I will ask a penny
of no man. "We accept your services, sir," said Birrell gravely. "What's your plan?"

In astonishment Major Bellew glanced from one to the other and then slapped the table with his
open palm. His voice shook with righteous indignation. And these last words he would often repeat, with demonstration of great fervency
of mind, being himself very confident and settled in belief of inestimable good by this voyage;
which the greater number of his followers nevertheless mistrusted altogether, not being made
partakers of those secrets, which the General kept unto himself. Yet all of them that are living
may be witnesses of his words and protestations, which sparingly I have delivered. Whereof,
indeed, we had enough.

But when he was entreated by the captain, master, and other his well-willers of the Hind not
to venture in the frigate, this was his answer: I will not forsake my little company going
homeward, with whom I have passed so many storms and perils. Seeing he would not bend to reason,
he had provision out of the Hind, such as was wanting aboard his frigate. And so we committed
him to God's protection, and set him aboard his pinnace, we being more than 300 leagues onward
of our way home. But we had only one, which they take an evil sign of more tempest; the same
is usual in storms. Yet still we looked out all that night, and ever after until we arrived
upon the coast of England; omitting no small sail at sea, unto which we gave not the tokens
between us agreed upon to have perfect knowledge of each other, if we should at any time be
separated.

In great torment of weather and peril of drowning it pleased God to send safe home the Golden
Hind, which arrived in Falmouth the 22 of September, being Sunday, not without as great danger
escaped in a flaw coming from the south-east, with such thick mist that we could not discern
land to put in right with the haven. From Falmouth we went to Dartmouth, and lay there at anchor
before the Range, while the captain went aland to enquire if there had been any news of the
frigate, which, sailing well, might happily have been before us; also to certify Sir John Gilbert,
brother unto the General, of our hard success, whom the captain desired, while his men were
yet aboard him, and were witnesses of all occurrences in that voyage, it might please him to
take the examination of every person particularly, in discharge of his and their faithful endeavour. She
passed the cottage where he had lodged, and hundreds of years seemed to have gone since she used
to wait for him in the street, blowing noisily on her automobile horn, calling derisively to
his open windows. Wherever she turned Fair Harbor spoke of him.


Nevertheless, when the captain returned aboard his ship, he found his men bent to depart every
man to his home; and then the wind serving to proceed higher upon the coast, they demanded
money to carry them home, some to London, others to Harwich, and elsewhere, if the barque should
be carried into Dartmouth and they discharged so far from home, or else to take benefit of
the wind, then serving to draw nearer home, which should be a less charge unto the captain,
and great ease unto the men, having else far to go. Reason accompanied with necessity persuaded
the captain, who sent his lawful excuse and cause of this sudden departure unto Sir John Gilbert,
by the boat of Dartmouth, and from thence the Golden Hind departed and took harbour at Weymouth.
All the men tired with the tediousness of so unprofitable a voyage to their seeming, in which
their long expense of time, much toil and labour, hard diet, and continual hazard of life was
unrecompensed; their captain nevertheless by his great charges impaired greatly thereby, yet
comforted in the goodness of God, and His undoubted providence following him in all that voyage,
as it doth always those at other times whosoever have confidence in Him alone. Yet have we
more near feeling and perseverance of His powerful hand and protection when God doth bring
us together with others into one same peril, in which He leaveth them and delivereth us, making
us thereby the beholders, but not partakers, of their ruin. Secondly, when by his former preparation
he was enfeebled of ability and credit to perform his designments, as it were impatient to
abide in expectation better opportunity, and means which God might raise, he thrust himself
again into the action, for which he was not fit, presuming the cause pretended on God's behalf
would carry him to the desired end. Into which having thus made re-entry, he could not yield
again to withdraw, though he saw no encouragement to proceed; lest his credit, foiled in his
first attempt, in a second should utterly be disgraced. Between extremities he made a right
adventure, putting all to God and good fortune; and, which was worst, refused not to entertain
every person and means whatsoever, to furnish out this expedition, the success whereof hath
been declared.

