The great day of his life arrives. Clad in rich uniform, he crosses to the eastern shore. A
breeze of morning moves. The planet of love is on high. It is only the sun tinting the bay
with golden gleams. Never a, steamer yet has ploughed these silent waters.

Morning's purple folds Tamalpais in a magic mantle. Rolling surges break on the bar outside
the Golden Gate. Don Miguel, attended by friends, receives his bride, the Rose of Alameda.
Shallops wait. The merry party sails for the western shore. Fluttering flags decorate this
little navy of San Francisco.

Merry laughter floats from boat to boat. The tinkle of the guitar sounds gaily. Two hours end
this first voyage of a new life.

At the embarcadero of Yerba Buena the party descends. They are met by a procession of all the
notables of the mission and Presidio. Hardy riders and ladies, staid matrons and blooming senoritas,
have gathered also from Santa Clara, Napa, and Sonoma. The one government brig is crowded with
a merry party from Monterey.

The broad "camino real" sweeps three miles over sand dunes to the mission. Past willow-shaded
lakes, through stunted live-oak groves, the wedding cavalcade advances. The poverty of the
"mozo" admits of a horse. Even the humblest admirer of Don Miguel to-day is in the saddle.
No one in California walks.

With courtly grace the warrior rides by his bride. Juanita Castro is a true Spanish senorita.
Blest with the beauty of youth and the modesty of the Castilian, the Rose of Alameda has the
blush of her garden blossoms on her virgin cheek. She walks a queen. She rides as only the
maids of Alta California can.

The shining white walls of the mission are near. Eager eyes watch in the belfry whence the
chimes proclaim the great event. To the west the Coast Range hides the blue Pacific. Rolling
sand hills mask the Presidio. East and south the panorama of shore and mountain frames the
jewel of the West, fair San Francisco bay.

Soldiers, traders, dull-eyed Indians, and joyous retainers crowd the approaches.

The cortege halts at the official residence. Soon the dark-eyed bride is arrayed in her simple
white robes. Attended by her friends, Juanita enters the house of the Lord. Don Luis Castro
supports the bride, who meets at the altar her spouse. Priests and their trains file in. The
fateful words are said.

Then the girl-wife on her liege lord's arm enters the residence of the Padres; a sumptuous
California breakfast awaits the "gente de razon."

Clangor of bells, firing of guns, vivas and popular clamor follow the party.

The humbler people are all regaled at neighboring "casas."

In the home of the Padres, the nuptial feast makes glad the gathered notables. The clergy are
the life of this occasion. They know when to lay by the austerity of official robes. From old
to young, all hearts are merry.

Alcaldes, officials, and baronial rancheros--all have gathered for this popular wedding.

Carrillos, Del Valles, Sepulvedas, Arguellos, Avilas, Ortegas, Estradas, Martinez, Aguirres
and Dominguez are represented by chiefs and ladies.

Beakers of mission vintages are drained in honor of the brave and fair. When the sun slopes
toward the hills, the leaders escort the happy couple to the Presidio. The Commandante and
his bride begin their path in life. It leads toward that yet unbuilt home in the wild hills
of Mariposa. With quaint garb, rich trappings, and its bright color, the train lends an air
of middle-age romance to the landscape.

Knightly blood, customs, and manners linger yet in the "dolce far niente" of this unwaked paradise
of the Occident. Sweetly sound the notes of the famous sacred mission bell. It was cast and
blessed at far Mendoza in Spain, in 1192. Generations and tens of generations have faded into
shadowy myths of the past since it waked first the Spanish echoes. Kings and crowns, even countries,
have passed into history's shadowy night since it first rang out. The cunning artificer, D.
Monterei, piously inscribed it with the name of "San Franisco." Mingled gold and silver alone
were melted for its making. Its sacred use saved the precious treasure many times from robbers.
Six hundred and fifty years that mellow voice has warned the faithful to prayer. Pride and
treasure of the Franciscans, it followed the "conquistadores" to Mexico. It rang its peal solemnly
at San Diego, when, on July 1, 1769, the cross of the blessed Redeemer was raised. The shores
of California were claimed for God by the apostolic representative, sainted Friar Junipero
Serra. In that year two babes were born far over the wild Atlantic, one destined to wrap the
world in flame, and the other to break down the mightiest modern empire of the sword. It was
the natal year of Napoleon Bonaparte, the child imperially crowned by nature, and that iron
chief, Arthur Wellesley, the Duke of Wellington.

The old bell sounded its first call to the faithful on San Francisco Bay, in 1776. It was but
a few months after the American colonists gave to wondering humanity their impassioned plea
for a world's liberty--the immortal Declaration of the Fourth of July.

No merrier peal ever sounded from its vibrant throat than the rich notes following Miguel Peralta
and his lovely Rose of Alameda.

Revelry reigns at the Presidio; Commandante Peralta's quarters are open. Music and brightest
eyes mark the closing of this day. In late watches the sentinels remember the feast as they
pace their rounds, for none are forgotten in largesse.

Fair Juanita learns to love the dainty title of Senora. Light is her heart as she leaves for
the Hills.

Don Miguel's barges already are on the San Joaquin. The cattle have reached their potreros
on the Mariposa. Artificer and "peon" are preparing a shelter for the lord of the grant.

Donna Juanita waves her hand in fond adieu as the schooner glides across to Alameda. Here Commandante
Miguel has a report of the arrival of his trains.

From the Castros' home, Juanita rides out toward the San Joaquin. Great commotion enlivens
the hacienda. Pack-trains are laden with every requisite--tents, hammocks, attendants, waiting-women
and retainers are provided.

Winding out of the meadows of the Alameda, eastwardly over the Coast Range defiles, the train
advances. Even here "los ladrones" (thieves of animals) are the forerunners of foreign robbers.
Guards watch the bride's slumbers.

Star-lit nights make the journey easy. It is the rainless summer time; no sound save the congress
of the coyotes, or the notes of the mountain owl, disturbs the dreams of the campers.

Don Miguel, in happiest mood, canters beside his wife. The party has its scouts far in advance.
Resting places in fragrant woods, with pure brooks and tender grass, mark the care of the outriders.

Over the Coast Range Juanita finds a land of delightful promise. Far away the rich valley of
the San Joaquin sweeps. Rolling hills lie on either side, golden tinted with the ripening wild
oats. Messengers join the party with auspicious reports.

Down the San Joaquin plains the train winds. Here Senora Peralta is in merry mood; hundreds
of stately elk swing tossing antlers, dashing away to the willows. Gray deer spring over brook
and fallen tree, led by some giant leader. Pigeons, grouse, doves, and quail cleave the air
with sudden alarm. Gorgeous in his painted plumage, the wood duck whirrs away over the slow
gliding San Joaquin. Swan and wild geese cover the little islands.

There are morning vocal concerts of a feathered orchestra. They wake the slumbering bride long
before Don Miguel calls his swarthy retainers to the day's march.

By night, in the valley, the sentinels watch for the yellow California lions, who delight to
prey on the animals of the train. Wild-cats, lynx, the beaver and raccoon scuttle away surprised
by this invasion of Nature's own game preserves.

It is with some terror that the young wife sees a display of native horsemanship. Lumbering
across the pathway of the train a huge grizzly bear attracts the dare-devils. Bruin rises on
his haunches; he snorts in disdain. A quickly cast lariat encircles one paw. He throws himself
down. Another lasso catches his leg. As he rolls and tugs, other fatal loops drop, as skilfully
aimed as if he were only a helpless bullock. Growling, rolling, biting, and tearing, he cannot
break or loosen the rawhide ropes. When he madly tries to pull in one, the agile horses strain
upon the others. He is firmly entangled. The giant bear is tightly bound.

Donna Juanita, her lord by her side, laughs at the dreaded "oso." She enjoys the antics of
the horsemen. They sport with their enemy. After the fun ends, Bruin receives a gunshot. Choice
cuts are added to the camp menu.

The bear, panther, and rattlesnake are the only dangers of the Californian woods.

Days of travel bring the hills of Mariposa into view. Here the monarchs of the forest rise
in air; their wild harps are swept by the cool breezes of the Sierras. Tall, stately redwoods,
swathed in rich, soft, fibrous bark, tower to the skies. Brave oaks spread their arms to shelter
the doe and her fawns. The madrona, with greenest leaf and pungent berry, stands here. Hazels,
willows, and cottonwoods follow the water. Bald knolls are studded with manzanita, its red
berry in harvest now. Sturdy groves of wild plum adorn the hillsides. Grouse and squirrel enjoy
their annual feast.

The journey is over. When the train winds around a sweeping range, Don Miguel nears his wife.
The San Joaquin is studded with graceful clumps of evergreen. In its bosom a lake shines like
a diamond. The Don uncovers smilingly. "Mi querida, there lies your home, Lagunitas," he murmurs.

Sweet Juanita's eyes beam on her husband. She says softly, "How beautiful!"

It is truly a royal domain. From the lake the ten leagues square of the Commandante's land
are a panorama of varying beauties. Stretching back into the pathless forests, game, timber,
wood, and building stones are at hand; a never-failing water supply for thousands of cattle
is here. To the front, right, and left, hill pastures and broad fields give every variety of
acreage.

Blithely the young wife spurs her favorite steed over the turf. She nears the quarters. The
old sergeant is the seneschal of this domain. He greets the new arrivals.

With stately courtesy the Commandante lifts his bride from her charger. The hegira is over.
The occupation of arranging abodes for all is the first task. Already the cattle, sheep, and
horses are fattening on the prairie grasses. Peons are sawing lumber. A detachment is making
bricks for the houses. These are one-storied mansions with wide porches, beloved by the Californians;
to-day the most comfortable homes in the West. Quaintly superstitious, the natives build so
for fear of earthquakes. Corrals, pens, and sheds have been first labors of the advance guard.
The stores and supplies are all housed.

Don Miguel left the choice of the mansion site to his Juanita. Together they visit the different
points of vantage. Soon the hacienda rises in solid, fort-like simplicity.

The bride at Lagunitas strives to aid her companion. She shyly expresses her preferences. All
is at her bidding.

Don Miguel erects his ranch establishment in a military style. It is at once a square stronghold
and mansion shaded with ample porches. Corrals for horses, pens for sheep, make up his constructions
for the first year. Already the herds are increasing under the eyes of his retainers.

The Commandante has learned that no manual work can be expected of his Californian followers,
except equestrian duties of guarding and riding.

A flash of mother-wit leads him to bring a hundred mission Indians from the bay. They bear
the brunt of mechanical toil.

Autumn finds Lagunitas Rancho in bloom. Mild weather favors all. Stores and supplies are brought
from San Francisco Bay.

Don Miguel establishes picket stations reaching to the Castro Rancho.

Save that Juanita Peralta sees no more the glories of the Golden Gate, her life is changed
only by her new, married relation. A few treasures of her girlhood are the sole reminders of
her uneventful springtime.

Rides through the forests, and canters over the grassy meadows with her beloved Miguel, are
her chiefest pleasures. Some little trading brings in the Indians of the Sierras. It amuses
the young Donna to see the bartering of game, furs, forest nuts, wild fruits and fish for the
simple stores of the rancho. No warlike cavaliers of the plains are these, with Tartar blood
in their veins, from Alaskan migration or old colonization. They have not the skill and mysterious
arts of the Aztecs.

These Piute Indians are the lowest order of indigenous tree dwellers. They live by the chase.
Without manufactures, with no language, no arts, no agriculture, no flocks or herds, these
wretches, clad in the skins of the minor animals, are God's meanest creatures. They live on
manzanita berry meal, pine-nuts, and grasshoppers. Bows and flint-headed arrows are their only
weapons. They snare the smaller animals. The defenceless deer yield to their stealthy tracking.
The giant grizzly and panther affright them. They cannot battle with "Ursus ferox."

Unable to cope with the Mexican intruders, these degraded tribes are also an easy prey to disease.
They live without general intercourse, and lurk in the foothills, or hide in the canons.

Juanita finds the Indian women peaceable, absolutely ignorant, and yet tender to their offspring.
The babes are carried in wicker baskets on their backs. A little weaving and basket-making
comprise all their feminine arts. Rudest skin clothing covers their stunted forms.

Don Miguel encourages the visits of these wild tribes. He intends to use them as a fringe of
faithful retainers between him and the Americans. They will warn him of any approach through
the Sierras of the accursed Yankee.

The Commandante, reared in a land without manufactures or artisans, regarding only his flocks
and herds, cherishes his military pride in firmly holding the San Joaquin for the authorities.
He never turns aside to examine the resources of his domain. The degraded character of the
Indians near him prevents any knowledge of the great interior. They do not speak the language
of his semi-civilized mission laborers from the Coast Range. They cannot communicate with the
superior tribes of the North and East. All their dialects are different.

Vaguely float in his memory old stories of the giant trees and the great gorge of the Yosemite.
He will visit yet the glistening and secret summits of the Sierras.

Weeks run into months. Comfort and plenty reign at Lagunitas. With his wife by his side, Miguel
cons his occasional despatches. He promises the Seflora that the spring shall see a chapel
erected. When he makes the official visit to the Annual Council, he will bring a padre, at
once friend, spiritual father, and physician. It is the first sign of a higher life--the little
chapel of Mariposa.

Winter winds sway the giant pines of the forests. Rains of heaven swell the San Joaquin. The
summer golden brown gives way to the velvety green of early spring.

Juanita meekly tells her beads. With her women she waits the day when the bell shall call to
prayer in Mariposa.

Wandering by Lagunitas, the wife strays in fancy to far lands beyond the ocean. The books of
her girlhood have given her only a misty idea of Europe. The awe with which she has listened
to the Padres throws a glamour of magic around these recitals of that fairy world beyond the seas.

Her life is bounded by the social horizon of her family circle; she is only the chatelaine.
Her domain is princely, but no hope clings in her breast of aught beside a faded middle age.
Her beauty hides itself under the simple robe of the Californian matron. Visitors are rare
in this lovely wilderness. The annual rodeo will bring the vaqueros together. Some travelling
officials may reach the San Joaquin. The one bright possibility of her life is a future visit
to the seashore.

Spring casts its mantle of wild flowers again over the hillocks. The rich grass waves high
in the potreros; the linnets sing blithely in the rose-bushes. Loyal Don Miguel, who always
keeps his word, girds himself for a journey to the distant Presidio. The chapel is finished.
He will return with the looked-for padre.

Leaving the sergeant in command, Don Miguel, with a few followers, speeds to the seashore.
Five days' swinging ride suffices the soldier to reach tide-water. He is overjoyed to find
that his relatives have determined to plant a family stronghold on the San Joaquin. This will
give society to the dark-eyed beauty by the Lagunitas who waits eagerly for her Miguel's return.

At the Presidio the Commandante is feasted. In a few days his business is over. Riding over
to the Mission Dolores, he finds a missionary priest from Acapulco. He is self-devoted to labor.
Father Francisco Ribaut is only twenty-five years of age. Born in New Orleans, he has taken
holy orders. After a stay in Mexico, the young enthusiast reaches the shores of the distant
Pacific.

Commandante Miguel is delighted. Francisco Ribaut is of French blood, graceful and kindly.
The Fathers of the mission hasten to provide the needs of Lagunitas chapel.

The barges are loaded with supplies, councils and business despatched. Padre Francisco and
Don Miguel reach the glens of Mariposa in the lovely days when bird, bud, and blossom make
Lagunitas a fairyland. In the mind of the veteran but one care lingers--future war. Already
the feuds of Alvarado and Micheltorrena presage a series of domestic broils. Don Miguel hears
that foreigners are plotting to return to the coast; they will come back under the protection
of foreign war-ships. As his horse bounds over the turf, the soldier resolves to keep out of
this coming conflict; he will guard his hard-won heritage. By their camp fire, Padre Francisco
has told him of the Americans wrenching Texas away from Mexico. The news of the world is imparted
to him. He asks the padre if the Gringos can ever reach the Pacific.

"As sure as those stars slope to the west," says the priest, pointing to Orion, gleaming jewel-like
in the clear skies of the Californian evening.

The don muses. This prophecy rankles in his heart. He fears to ask further. He fears these Yankees.

Joy reigns at Lagunitas! A heartfelt welcome awaits the priest, a rapturous greeting for Don
Miguel. The grassy Alamedas are starred with golden poppies. Roses adorn the garden walks of
the young wife. Her pensive eyes have watched the valley anxiously for her lord.

Padre Francisco hastens to consecrate the chapel. The Virgin Mother spreads her sainted arms
on high. A school for the Indians soon occupies the priest.

Months roll around. The peace and prosperity of the rancho are emulated by the new station
in the valley.

Don Miguel rides over the mountains often in the duties of his position. Up and down the inland
basin bronzed horsemen sweep over the untenanted regions, locating new settlements. San Joaquin
valley slowly comes under man's dominion.

Patriot, pioneer, and leader, the Commandante travels from Sutter's Fort to Los Angeles. He
goes away light-hearted. The young wife has a bright-eyed girl to fondle when the chief is
in the saddle.

Happiness fills the parents' hearts. The baptism occasions the greatest feast of Lagunitas.
But, from the coast, as fall draws near, rumors of trouble disturb the San Joaquin.

Though the Russians are about to leave the seacoast, still Swiss Sutter has taken foothold
on the Sacramento. The adherents of Micheltorrena and Alvarado arc preparing for war in the
early spring. To leave Lagunitas is impossible. The Indian tribes are untrustworthy. They show
signs of aggressiveness. Father Ribaut finds the Indians of the Sierras a century behind those
of the coast. They are devoid of spiritual ideas. Contact with traders, and association with
wild sea rovers, have given the Indians of the shore much of the groundwork of practical civilization.

To his alarm, Don Miguel sees the Indians becoming treacherous. He discovers they make voyages
to the distant posts, where they obtain guns and ammunition.

In view of danger, the Commandante trains his men. The old soldier sighs to think that the
struggle may break out between divided factions of native Californians. The foreigners may
gain foothold in California while its real owners quarrel.

The second winter at Lagunitas gives way to spring. Rapidly increasing herds need for their
care all the force of the ranch.

From the coast plentiful supplies provided by the Commandante arrive. With them comes the news
of the return of the foreigners. They are convoyed by a French frigate, and on the demand of
the British consul at Acapulco they are admitted. This is grave news.

Donna Juanita and the padre try to smooth the gloomy brow of Don Miguel. All in vain. The "pernicious
foreigner" is once more on the shores of Alta California. The Mexican eagle flutters listlessly
over the sea gates of the great West. The serpent coils of foreign conspiracy are twining around
it.

CHAPTER III.

A MISSING SENTINEL.---FREMONT'S CAMP.

"Quien Vive!" A sentinel's challenge rings out. The sounds are borne away on the night wind
sweeping Gavilan Peak. No response. March breezes drive the salty fog from Monterey Bay into
the eyes of the soldier shivering in the silent hours before dawn.

"Only a coyote or a mountain wolf," mutters Maxime Valois. He resumes his tramp along the rocky
ramparts of the Californian Coast Range. His eyes are strained to pierce the night. He waits,
his finger on the trigger of his Kentucky rifle.

Surely something was creeping toward him from the chaparral. No: another illusion. Pride keeps
him from calling for help. Three-score dauntless "pathfinders" are sleeping here around intrepid
Fremont.

It is early March in 1846. Over in the valley the herd-guard watch the animals. "No, not an
Indian," mutters the sentinel. "They would stampede the horses at once. No Mexican would brave
death here," muses Valois.

Only a boy of twenty, he is a veteran already. He feels for his revolver and knife. He knows
he can defy any sneaking Californian.

"It must be some beast," he concludes, as he stumbles along the wind-swept path. Maxime Valois
dreams of his far-away home on the "Lower Coast," near New Orleans. He wanders along, half
asleep. This hillside is no magnolia grove.

It is but a year since he joined the great "Pathfinder's" third voyage over the lonely American
Desert. He has toiled across to the Great Salt Lake, down the dreary Humboldt, and over the
snowy Sierras.

Down by Walker's Lake the "pathfinders" have crept into the valley of California. As he shields
his face from biting winds, he can see again the panorama of the great plains, billowy hills,
and broad vistas, tantalizing in their deceptive nearness. Thundering herds of buffalo and
all the wild chivalry of the Sioux and Cheyennes sweep before him. The majestic forests of
the West have darkened his way. The Great Salt Lake, a lonely inland sea; Lake Tahoe, a beautiful
jewel set in snowy mountains; and its fairy sisters near Truckee--all these pass before his
mental vision.

But the youth is tired. Onward ever, like the "Wandering Jew," still to the West with Fremont.

Pride and hot southern blood nerve him in conflicts with the fierce savages. Dashing among
the buffalo, he has ridden in many a wild chase where a single stumble meant death. His rifle
has rung the knell of elk and bear, of wolf and panther.

These varied excitements repaid the long days of march, but the Louisianian is mercurial. Homeward
wander his thoughts.

Hemmed in, with starvation near, in the Sierras, he welcomes this forlorn-hope march to the
sea. Fremont with a picked squad has swept down to Sutter's Fort to send succor to the remaining
"voyageurs."

But the exploring march to Oregon, and back East by the southern road, appalls him. He is tired
now. He would be free. As a mere volunteer, he can depart as soon as the frigate PORTSMOUTH
arrives at Monterey. He is tired of Western adventures. Kit Carson, Aleck Godey, and Dick Owens
have taught him their border lore. They all love the young Southerner.

The party are now on the defensive. Maxime Valois knows that General Jose Castro has forbidden
them to march toward Los Angeles. Governor Pio Pico is gathering his army to overawe "los Americanos."

Little does Valois think that the guns of Palo Alto and Resaca de la Palma will soon usher
in the Mexican war. The "pathfinders" are cut off from home news. He will join the American
fleet, soon expected.

He will land at Acapulco, and ride over to the city of Mexico. From Vera Cruz he can reach
New Orleans and the old Valois plantation, "Belle Etoile." The magnolias' fragrance call him
back to-night.

Another rustle of the bushes. Clinging to his rifle, he peers into the gloom. How long these
waiting hours! The gleaming stars have dipped into the far Pacific. The weird hours of the
night watch are ending. Ha! Surely that was a crouching form in the arroyo. Shall he fire?
No. Another deception of night. How often the trees have seemed to move toward him! Dark beings
fancifully seemed to creep upon him. Nameless terrors always haunt these night hours.

To be laughed at on rousing the camp? Never! But his inner nature tingles now with the mysterious
thrill of danger. Eagerly he scans his post. The bleak blasts have benumbed his senses.

Far away to the graceful groves and Gallic beauties of Belle Etoile his truant thoughts will
fly once more. He wonders why he threw up his law studies under his uncle, Judge Valois, to
rove in this wilderness.

Reading the exploits of Fremont fascinated the gallant lad.

As his foot falls wearily, the flame of his enthusiasm flickers very low.

Turning at the end of his post he starts in alarm. Whizz! around his neck settles a pliant
coil, cast twenty yards, like lightning. His cry for help is only a gurgle. The lasso draws
tight. Dark forms dart from the chaparral. A rough hand stifles him. His arms are bound. A
gag is forced in his mouth. Dragged into the bushes, his unknown captors have him under cover.

The boy feels with rage and shame his arms taken from his belt. His rifle is gone. A knife
presses his throat. He understands the savage hiss, "Vamos adelante, Gringo!" The party dash
through the chaparral.

Valois, bruised and helpless, reflects that his immediate death seems not to be his captors'
will. Will the camp be attacked? Who are these? The bitter words show them to be Jose Castro's
scouts. Is there a force near? Will they attack? All is silent.

In a few minutes an opening is reached. Horses are there. Forced to mount, Maxime Valois rides
away, a dozen guards around him. Grim riders in scrapes and broad sombreros are his escort.
The guns on their shoulders and their jingling machetes prove them native cavalry.

For half an hour Valois is busy keeping his seat in the saddle. These are no amiable captors.
The lad's heart is sad. He speaks Spanish as fluently as his native French. Every word is familiar.

A camp-fire flickers in the live-oaks. He is bidden to dismount. The lair of the guerillas
is safe from view of the "pathfinders."

The east shows glimmers of dawn. The prisoner warms his chilled bones at the fire. He sees
a score of bronzed faces scowling at him. Preparations for a meal are hastened. A swarthy soldier,
half-bandit, half-Cossack in bearing, tells him roughly to eat. They must be off.

Maxime already realizes he has been designedly kidnapped. His capture may provide information
for Castro's flying columns. These have paralleled their movements, from a distance, for several
weeks. Aware of the ferocity of these rancheros, he obeys instantly each order. He feigns ignorance
of the language. Tortillas, beans, some venison, with water, make up the meal. It is now day.
Valois eats. He knows his ordeal. He throws himself down for a rest. He divines the journey
will be hurried. A score of horses are here tied to the trees. In a half hour half of these
are lazily saddled. Squatted around, the soldiers keep a morose silence, puffing the corn-husk
cigarette. The leader gives rapid directions. Valois now recalls his locality as best he can.
Fremont's camp on Gavilan Peak commands the Pajaro, Salinas, and Santa Clara. A bright sun
peeps over the hills. If taken west, his destination must be Monterey; if south, probably Los
Angeles; and if north, either San Francisco Bay or the Sacramento, the headquarters of the
forces of Alta California.

Dragged like a beast from his post, leaving the lines unguarded! What a disgrace! Bitterly
does he remember his reveries of the home he may never again see.

The party mounts. Two men lead up a tame horse without bridle. The leader approaches and searches
him. All his belongings fill the saddle-pouches of the chief. A rough gesture bids him mount
the horse, whose lariat is tied to a guard's saddle. Valois rages in despair as the guard taps
his own revolver. Death on the slightest suspicious movement, is the meaning of that sign.

With rough adieus the party strike out eastwardly toward the San Joaquin. Steadily following
the lope of the taciturn leader, they wind down Pacheco Pass. Valois' eyes rove over the beautiful
hills of the Californian coast. Squirrels chatter on the live-oak branches, and the drumming
grouse noisily burst out of their manzanita feeding bushes.

Onward, guided by distant peak and pass, they thread the trail. No word is spoken save some
gruff order. Maxime's captors have the hang-dog manner of the Californian. They loll on their
mustangs, lazily worrying out the long hours. A rest is taken for food at noon. The horses
are herded an hour or so and the advance resumed.

Nightfall finds Valois in a squalid adobe house, thirty miles from Gavilan Peak. An old scrape
is thrown him. His couch is the mud floor.

The youth sleeps heavily. His last remembrance is the surly wish of a guard that Commandante
Miguel Peralta will hang the accursed Gringo.

At daybreak he is roused by a carelessly applied foot. The dejected "pathfinder" begins his
second day of captivity. He fears to converse. He is warned with curses to keep silent. In
the long day Maxime concludes that the Mexicans suspect treachery by Captain Fremont's "armed
exploration in the name of science."

These officials hate new-comers. Valois had been, like other gilded youth of New Orleans, sent
to Paris by his opulent family. He knows the absorbing interest of the South in Western matters.
Stern old Tom Benton indicated truly the onward march of the resistless American. In his famous
speech, while the senatorial finger pointed toward California, he said with true inspiration:
"There is the East; there is the road to India."

All the adventurers of the South are ready to stream to the West. Maxime knows the jealous
Californian officials. The particulars of Fremont's voyage of 1842 to the Rockies, and his
crossing to California in 1843, are now history. His return on the quest, each time with stronger
parties and a more formidable armament, is ominous. It warns the local hidalgos that the closed
doors of the West must yield to the daring touch of the American---manifest destiny.

The enemy are hovering around the "pathfinders" entrenched on the hills; they will try to frighten
them into return, and drive them out of the regions of Alta California. Some sly Californian
may even contrive an Indian attack to obliterate them.

Valois fears not the ultimate fate of the friends he has been torn away from. The adventurous
boy knows he will be missed at daybreak. The camp will be on the alert to meet the enemy. Their
keen-eyed scouts can read the story of his being lassoed and carried away from the traces of
the deed.

The young rover concludes he is to be taken before some superior officer, some soldier charged
with defending Upper California. This view is confirmed. Down into the valley of the San Joaquin
the feet of the agile mustangs bear the jaded travellers.

They cross the San Joaquin on a raft, swimming their horses. Valois sees nothing yet to hint
his impending fate. Far away the rich green billows of spring grass wave in the warm sun. Thousands
of elk wander in antlered armies over the meadows. Gay dancing yellow antelope bound over the
elastic turf. Clouds of wild fowl, from the stately swan to the little flighty snipe, crowd
the tule marshes of this silent river. It is the hunter's paradise. Wild cattle, in sleek condition,
toss their heads and point their long, polished horns. Mustangs, fleet as the winds, bound
along, disdaining their meaner brethren, bowing under man's yoke. At the occasional mud-walled
ranches, vast flocks of fat sheep whiten the hills.

Maxime mentally maps the route he travels. Alas! no chance of escape exists. At the first open
attempt a rifle-ball, or a blow from a razor-edged machete, would end his earthly wanderings.
Despised, shunned by even the wretched women at the squalid ranchos, he feels utterly alone.
The half-naked children timidly flee from him. The wicked eyes of his guards never leave him.
He knows a feeling animates the squad, that he would be well off their hands by a use of the
first handy limb and a knotted lariat. The taciturn chief watches over him. He guards an ominous
silence.

The cavalcade, after seven days, are in sight of the purpled outlines of the sculptured Sierras.
They rise heavenward to the sparkling crested pinnacles where Bret Harte's poet fancy sees
in long years after the "minarets of snow." Valley oaks give way to the stately pines. Olive
masses of enormous redwoods wrap the rising foot-hills. Groves of laurel, acorn oak, and madrona
shelter the clinging panther and the grim warden of the Sierras, the ferocious grizzly bear.

Over flashing, bounding mountain brooks, cut up with great ledges of blue bed rock, they splash.
Here the silvery salmon and patrician trout leap out from the ripples to glide into the great
hollowed pools, yet the weary cavalcade presses on. Will they never stop?

Maxime Valois' haggard face looks back at him from the mirrored waters of the Cottonwood, the
Merced, and the Mariposa. The prisoner sees there only the worn features of his strangely altered
self. He catches no gleam of the unreaped golden harvest lying under the feet of the wild mustangs.
These are the treasure channels of the golden West.

The mountain gnomes of this mystic wilderness are already in terror lest some fortunate fool
may utter the one magic word, "Gold." It will call greedy thousands from the uttermost parts
of the earth to break the seals of ages, and burrow far below these mountain bases. Through
stubborn granite wall, tough porphyry, ringing quartz, and bedded gnarled gneiss, men will
grope for the feathery, fairy veins of the yellow metal.

A feverish quest for gold alone can wake the dreamy "dolce far niente" of the Pacific. God's
fairest realm invites the foot of man in vain. Here the yellow grains will be harvested, which
buy the smiles of beauty, blunt the sword of justice, and tempt the wavering conscience of
young and old. It will bring the human herd to one grovelling level--human swine rooting after
the concrete token of power. Here, in later years, the wicked arm of power will be given golden
hammers to beat down all before it. Here will that generation arise wherein the golden helmet
can dignify the idle and empty pate.

Maxime, now desperate, is ready for any fate. Only let this long ride cease. Sweeping around
the hills, for the first time he sees the square courtyard, the walled casas of the rancho
of Lagunitas.

By the shores of the flashing mountain lake, with the rich valley sweeping out before it, it
lies in peace. The fragrant forest throws out gallant flanking wings of embattled trees. It
is the residence of the lord of ten leagues square. This is the great Peralta Rancho.

In wintering in the San Joaquin, Maxime has often heard of the fabulous wealth and power of
this inland chieftain. Don Miguel Peralta is Commandante of the San Joaquin. By a fortunate
marriage he is related to Jose Castro, the warlike Commandante general of Pio Pico--a man of
mark now. Thousands of cattle and horses, with great armies of sheep, are herded by his semi-military
vaqueros. The young explorer easily divines now the reason of his abduction.

The party dismounts. While the sergeant seeks the major-domo, Valois' wondering eye gazes on
the beauties of lake and forest. Field and garden, bower and rose-laden trellises lie before
him. The rich autumn sun will ripen here deep-dyed clusters of the sweet mission grapes. It
is a lordly heritage, and yet his prison. Broad porches surround the plaza. There swinging
hammocks, saddled steeds, and waiting retainers indicate the headquarters of the Californian Don.

Maxime looks with ill-restrained hatred at his fierce guards. They squat on the steps and eye
him viciously. He is under the muzzle of his own pistol. It is their day of triumph.

Dragging across the plaza, with jingling spur, trailing leggings, and sombrero pushed back
on his head, the sergeant comes. He points out Maxime to a companion. The new-comer conducts
the American prisoner to a roughly furnished room. A rawhide bed and a few benches constitute
its equipment. A heavy door is locked on him. The prisoner throws himself on the hard couch
and sleeps. He is wakened by an Indian girl bringing food and water. Some blankets are carelessly
tossed in by a "mozo." The wanderer sleeps till the birds are carolling loudly in the trees.

Hark! a bell! He springs to the window. Valois sees a little chapel, with its wooden cross
planted in front. Is there a priest here? The boy is of the old faith. He looks for a possible
friend in the padre. Blessed bell of peace and hope!

Sturdy and serious is the major-domo who briskly enters Valois' room.

"Do you speak Spanish?" he flatly demands in that musical tongue.

"Yes," says Maxime, without hesitation. He knows no subterfuge will avail. His wits must guard
his head.

"Give me your name, rank, and story," demands the steward.

Valois briefs his life history.

"You will be taken to the Commandante. I advise you not to forget yourself; you may find a
lariat around your neck." With which admonition the major-domo leaves. He tosses Maxime a bunch
of cigaritos, and offers him a light ere going, with some show of courtesy.

Valois builds no fallacious hopes on this slender concession. He knows the strange Mexicans.
They would postpone a military execution if the condemned asked for a smoke.

Facing his fate, Maxime decides, while crossing the plaza, to conceal nothing. He can honorably
tell his story. Foreigners have been gathering in California for years. The Commandante can
easily test his disclosures, so lying would be useless. He believes either a British or American
fleet will soon occupy California. The signs of the times have been unmistakable since the
last return of the foreigners. Will he live to see the day? "Quien sabe?"

Maxime sees a stern man of fifty seated in his official presence room. Commandante Miguel Peralta
is clad in his undress cavalry uniform. The sergeant captor is in attendance, while at the
door an armed sentinel hovers. This is the wolf's den. Maxime is wary and serious.

"You are a Yankee, young man," begins the soldier. Maxime Valois' Creole blood stirs in his veins.

"I am an American, Senor Commandante, "from New Orleans. No Yankee!" he hotly answers, forgetting
prudence. Peralta opens his eyes in vague wonder. No Yankee? He questions the rash prisoner.
Valois tells the facts of Fremont's situation, but he firmly says he knows nothing of his future
plans.

"Why so?" demands Peralta. "Are you a common soldier?" Maxime explains his position as a volunteer.

A pressing inquest follows. Maxime's frankness touches the Commandante favorably. "I will see
you in a day or so. I shall hold you as a prisoner till I know if your chief means war. I may
want you as an interpreter if I take the field."

"Sergeant," he commands.

The captor salutes his chief.

"Has this young man told me the truth?"

"As far as I know, Senior Don Miguel," is the reply.

"See that he has all he wants. Keep him watched. If he behaves himself, let him move around.
He is not to talk to any one. If he tries to escape, shoot him. If he wants to see me, let
me know."

The Commandante lights a Mexican cigar, and signs to the sergeant to remove his prisoner. Maxime
sees a score of soldiers wandering around the sunny plaza, where a dozen fleet horses stand
saddled. He feels escape is hopeless. As he moves to the door, the chapel bell rings out again,
and with a sudden inspiration he halts.

"Senior Commandante, can I see the priest?" he asks.

"What for?" sharply demands the officer.

"I am a Catholic, and would like to talk to him."

Don Miguel Peralta gazes in wonder. "A Gringo and a Catholic! I will tell him to see you."

Valois is reconducted to his abode. He leaves a puzzled Commandante, who cannot believe that
any despised "Gringo" can be of the true faith. He has only seen the down-east hide traders,
who are regarded as heathen by the orthodox Dons of the Pacific.

Don Miguel knows not that the mariners from Salem and the whalers of New England hold different
religious views from the impassioned Creoles of the Crescent City.

The prisoner's eye catches the black robe of the priest fluttering among the rose walks of
the garden. Walking with him is a lady, while a pretty girl of seven or eight years plays in
the shady bowers.

The sergeant gruffly fulfils the orders of his chief. Maxime is given the articles needed for
his immediate use. He fears now, at least, a long captivity, but a war may bring his doom suddenly
on him.

There is an air of authority in Miguel Peralta's eye, which is a guarantee of honor, as well
as a personal menace. His detention will depend on the actions of the besieged Fremont.

Valois prays that bloodshed may not occur. His slender chances hang now on a peaceable solution
of the question of this Yankee visit.

There have been days in the dreary winter, when Maxime Valois has tried to divine the future
of the magnificent realm he traverses. His education and birth gave him the companionship of
the scientific subordinates of the party. His services claimed friendly treatment of the three
engineer officers in command. That the American flag will finally reach the western ocean he
doubts not. Born in the South, waited upon by patrimonial slaves, he is attached to the "peculiar
institution" which throws its dark shadow on the flag of this country. Already statesmen of
the party have discussed the question of the extension of slavery. Maxime Valois knows that
the line of the Missouri Compromise will here give a splendid new southern star to the flag
south of 36 deg 30 min. In the long, idle hours of camp chat, he has laughingly pledged he
would bring a band of sable retainers to this western terra incognita. He dreamed of establishing
a great plantation, but the prison cell shatters these foolish notions.

He marvels at his romantic year's experience. Was it to languish in a lonely prison life on
the far Pacific, that he left the gay circle at far-off Belle Etoile? Worn with fatigue, harassed
with loneliness, a prisoner among strangers, Maxime Valois' heart fails him. Sinking on the
couch, he buries his head in his hands.

No present ray of hope cheers the solitary American. He raises his eyes to see the thoughtful
face of a young priest at the door of his prison room.

CHAPTER IV.

HELD BY THE ENEMY.--"THE BEAR FLAG."

The padre bends searching eyes on the youth as the door opens. The priest's serious face heightens
his thirty-five years. He is worn by toil as a missionary among the tribes of the Gila--the
Apaches and the wild and brutal Mojaves. Here, among the Piute hill dwellers, his task is hopeless.
This spiritual soil is indeed stony. Called from the society of Donna Juanita and his laughing
pupil, merry Dolores, he comes to test the religious faith of the young freebooter--Yankee
and Catholic at once.

Maxime's downcast appearance disarms the padre. Not such a terrible fire-eater! He savors not
of infidel Cape Cod.

"My son, you are in trouble," softly says the padre. It is the first kind word Maxime has heard.
The boy's heart is full, so he speaks freely to the mild-mannered visitor. Padre Francisco
listens to the recital. His eyes sparkle strangely when Valois speaks of New Orleans.

"Then you understand French?" cries the padre joyously.

"It is my native tongue," rejoins Valois proudly.

"My name before I took orders was Francois Ribaut," says the overjoyed father. "Hold! I must
see Don Miguel. I am a Frenchman myself." He flies over the plaza, his long robe fluttering
behind him. His quickened steps prove a friendly interest. Maxima's heart swells within him.
The beloved language has unlocked the priestly heart.

In five minutes the curate is back. "Come with me, 'mon fils,'" he says. Guided by the priest,
Maxime leaves his prison, its unlocked door swinging open. They reach the head of the square.

By the chapel is Padre Francisco's house, school-room, and office. A sacristy chamber connects
chapel and dwelling.

The missionary leads the way to the chancel, and points to the altar rails.

"I will leave you," he whispers.

There, on his knees, where the wondering Indians gaze in awe of the face on the Most Blessed
Virgin, Maxime thanks God for this friend raised up to him in adversity.

He rejoins the missionary on the rose-shaded porch. In friendly commune he answers every eager
query of the padre. The priest finds Maxime familiar with Paris. It is manna in the wilderness
to this lonely man of God to speak of the beloved scenes of his youth.

After the Angelus, Maxime rests in the swinging hammock. The priest confers with the Commandante.
His face is hopeful on returning. "My poor boy," he says, "I gained one favor. Don Miguel allows
me to keep you here. He loves not the American. Promise me, my son, on the blessed crucifix,
that you will not escape. You must not aid the American troops in any way; on this hangs your
life."

These words show that under the priest's frock beats yet the gallant heart of the French gentleman.
Maxima solemnly promises. The good father sits under the vines, a happy man.

Day by day the new friends stroll by the lake. Seated where below them the valley shines in
all its bravery of spring, surrounded with the sighing pines, Padre Francisco tells of the
resentment of the Californians toward all Americans. They are all "Gringos," "thieving Yankees."

"Be careful, my son, even here. Our wild vaqueros have waylaid and tortured to death some foreigners.
The Diggers, Utes, and Hill Indians butcher any wanderer. Keep closely under my protection.
Don Miguel adores Donna Juanita, sweet Christian lady! She will lend me aid; you are thus safe.
If your people leave the Hawk's Peak without a battle, our cavalry will not take the field;
we expect couriers momentarily. Should fighting begin, Don Miguel will lead his troops. He
will then take you as guide or interpreter; God alone must guard you." The man of peace crosses
himself in sadness. "Meanwhile, I will soften the heart of Don Miguel."

Maxime learns of the padre's youth. Educated for the Church after a boyhood spent in Paris,
he sailed for Vera Cruz. He has been for years among the Pacific Indians. He familiarized himself
with the Spanish language and this western life in Mexico. Stout-hearted Padre Francisco worked
from mission to mission till he found his self-chosen field in California.

The "pathfinder" sees the decadence of priestly influence. Twenty-one flourishing missions
have been secularized by Governor Hijar since 1834. Now the superior coast tribes are scattered,
and the civilizing work since 1769 is all lost to human progress. In glowing words Padre Francisco
tells of idle farms, confiscated flocks, and ruined works of utility. Beautiful San Luis Rey
is crumbling to decay. Its bells hang silent. The olive and vine scatter their neglected fruits.
The Padres are driven off to Mexico. The pious fund is in profane coffers. San Juan Capistrano
shines out a lonely ruin in the southern moonlight. The oranges of San Gabriel now feed only
the fox and coyote. Civil dissension and wars of ambitious leaders follow the seizure of the
missions. Strangers have pillaged the religious settlements. All is relapsing into savagery.
In a few stations, like Monterey, Santa Clara, Santa Barbara, and Yerba Buena, a lonely shepherd
watches a diminished flock; but the grand mission system is ruined.

"Does not the Government need the missions?" queries Maxime.

"Ah! my son, Sonoma and San Rafael are kept up to watch the Russians at Fort Ross. Sutter menaces
us at New Helvetia. I can see the little cloud of the future, which will break one day in storm."

"Whence comes it, father?" queries the prisoner.

"From the United States," replies the padre. "Our whole political system is paralyzed. The
Americans have supported the Texans in battle. That splendid land is dropping away from Mexico.
We will lose this glorious land, and our beloved flag will go down forever. The Government
sleeps, and the people will be ruined. There are two thousand scattered foreigners here to-day.
They gain daily: we weaken hourly. When your people in numbers follow such leaders as your
gallant captain over the plains, we will lose this land also."

The padre sighed. His years of hard endeavor are wasted, the fruits are wanting, his labor is vain.

"Why is not your Government more vigorous?" says the stranger.

"My son, our pastoral life builds up no resources of this great land. The young men will not
work; they only ride around. Flocks and herds alone will not develop this paradise. The distance
from Mexico has broken the force of the laws. In fifty-five years of Spanish rule and twenty-three
more of Mexican, we have had twenty-two different rulers. The old families have lost their
loyalty, and they now fight each other for supremacy. All is discord and confusion in Alta
California."

"And the result?" questions Maxime.

"Either England or the United States will sweep us off forever," mourns the padre. He addresses
himself to his beads. Bright sunlight wakes Maxime with the birds. The matin bell rings out.
He rises refreshed by the father's hospitality.

During the day Valois measures the generosity of Padre Francisco. A few treasured books enable
Maxime to amuse himself. As yet he dares not venture out of the garden.

The sound of clattering hoofs causes the prisoner to drop his volume. He sits enjoying a flask
of ripe claret, for he is broken down and needs recruiting.

A courier spurs his foam-covered horse up to the Commandante's porch. Panting and staggering,
the poor beast shows the abuse of a merciless rider. The messenger's heels are adorned with
two inch spiked wheels, bloody with spurring the jaded beast.

Peace or war? Maxime's heart beats violently. He prudently withdraws. The wild soldiery gather
on the plaza. His guards are there with his own weapons, proudly displayed.

The Southerner chafes in helplessness. Could he but have his own horse and those weapons, he
would meet any two of them in the open. They are now clamoring against the Gringos. Soon the
courier reappears. All is bustle and shouting. Far away, on the rich knolls, Maxime sees fleet
riders gathering up the horses nearest the ranch. When Padre Francisco arrives from his morning
lessons, a troop of vaqueros are arrayed on the plaza.

"The news?" eagerly queries Maxime.

"Thanks be to God!" says the padre, "Fremont has broken camp after five days' stay at the Hawk's
Peak. He is moving north. There has been skirmishing, but no battle. Don Miguel is sending
a company to watch their march, and will attack if they menace any of our sentinels. The Americans
may, however, go into Oregon, or back over the mountains. The Commandante will keep his main
force in the valley. If they turn back, he will dispute their passage. You will be kept here."

Valois gazes on the departure. He takes an informal adieu of those trusty weapons which have
been with him in so many scenes of danger.

The last files sweep down the trail. Lagunitas Lake smiles peacefully from its bowers. The
war clouds have rolled north.

As days glide by, the priest and his youthful charge grow into each other's hearts. Padre Francisco
is young enough still to have some flowers of memory blossoming over the stone walls of his
indomitable heart. Maxime learns the story of his early life. He listens to the padre's romantic
recitals of the different lands he has strayed over. Couriers arrive daily with news of Fremont's
whirling march northward. The explorer travels like a Cossack in simplicity. He rides with
the sweep of the old Tartars. Cool, wary and resolute, the "Pathfinder" manoeuvres to baffle
clumsy Castro. He may yet elude his pursuers, or cut his way out.

Don Miguel steadily refuses to see Maxime. Through the padre, Maxime receives any necessary
messages or questions.

The Louisianian learns that all the foreigners are in commotion. Peralta's spies bring rumors
of war vessels expected, both English and American.

In New Helvetia, in Sonoma, at Monterey, and in Yerba Buena, guided by the most resolute, the
aliens are quietly arming; they are secretly organizing.

March wears away into April. The breath of May is wafted down in spicy odors from the forests.

Fremont is away hiding where the great Sacramento River mountains break into the gorgeous canyons
of its headwaters. Will he never turn?

The padre, now unreservedly friendly, tells Maxime that Castro fears to attack Fremont in the
open field. He has sent Indian runners to stir up the wild Klamath, Snake River, and Oregon
Indians against the Americans. This is serious. Should the explorers receive a check there,
they would retreat; then the guerillas would cut them off easily.

Padre Francisco fears for the result. He tells Maxime that bands of fierce vaqueros are riding
the roads; they have already butchered straggling foreigners. A general war of extermination
may sweep from Sonoma to San Diego.

Valois' weary eyes have roved from mountain to valley for many days. Will he ever regain his
liberty? A few morning walks with the padre, and a stroll by the waters of Lagunitas, are his
only liberties.

The priest is busy daily with the instruction of little Dolores. The child's sweet, dancing
eyes belie her mournful name. Valois has passed quiet Donna Juanita often in the garden walks.
A light bending of her head is her only answer to the young man's respectful salutation. She,
too, fears and distrusts all Americans.

The roses have faded from her cheeks too early. It is the hard lot of the California lady.
Though wealth of lands in broad leagues dotted with thousands of cattle, horses, and sheep
is hers, this daughter of an old feudal house has dreamed away a lonely life. It is devoid
of all social pleasures since she became the first lady of Lagunitas.

Colorless and sad is her daily life. Denied society by her isolation, she is yet too proud
to associate with her women dependants.

Her lord is away often in the field. His days are spent galloping over his broad domains. There
is no intellectual life, no change of day and day. The years have silently buried themselves,
with no crown of happy memories. She left her merry home at the Alameda shore of the great
bay to be the lonely lady of this distant domain. Her narrow nature has settled into imitative
and mechanical devotion, a sad, cold faith.

Youthful lack of education has not been repaired by any individual experience of life. Maternity
has been a mere physical epoch of her dreary womanhood. The current of her days in narrow channels
sluggishly flows toward its close.

Even the laughing child runs away from the young "pathfinder." She furtively peers at him from
the shelter of the graceful vines and rose bowers of her playground.

Maxime has exhausted the slender library of his friend. In the peaceful evening hours he listens
to weird stories of the lonely land of the Far West--early discovery, zealous monkish exploration,
daring voyages in trackless unknown seas, and the descent of curious strangers. Bold Sir Francis
Drake, Cabrillo, Viscaino, Portala, the good Junipero Serra of sainted memory, live again in
these recitals.

Day by day passes. No news from the Americans at bay in the wilds of the Klamath. By courier
the Don has heard of Castro's feeble moves. He toils along with his cavalry, guns, and foot
soldiers, whom Fremont defied from behind the rocky slopes of Hawk's Peak. The foreigners are
all conspiring.

A cloud of government agents are scouring the valleys for aid to send a column to attack Fremont.
It had been a pride of Don Miguel's military career to assist warlike Vallejo to drive the
foreigners from Monterey in 1840. He is ready for the fray again.

The Commandante gnashed his teeth when he heard, in 1842, at Lagunitas, that the strangers
had returned. He remembers the shameful day of October 19, 1842, when the Yankee frigates covered
Monterey with their guns, while Commodore Jones hoisted the stars and stripes for a day or
so. Always before the English.

Though it was disowned, this act showed how easily the defenceless coast could be ravaged.
Many times did he thank the Blessed Virgin that his domain was far away in the inland basin.
There his precious herds are safe from the invader.

There is danger for Valois in the Commandante's scowl when the saddest May day of his life
comes. A rider on relay horses hands him a fateful despatch.

"Curse the Gringos!" He strikes his table till the glasses ring.

There are five huge Yankee war vessels in Monterey harbor. It is too true. This time they have
come to stay. Padre Francisco softly makes his exit. He keeps Maxime in cover for a day or so.

Bit by bit, the details come to light. The SAVANNAH, PORTSMOUTH, CYANE, LEVANT, and CONGRESS
bear the flag of Commodore Sloat. This force can crush any native army. All communication by
sea with Mexico is now cut off. The Californian Government is paralyzed.

Worse and worse, the wild Klamath warriors have failed in their midnight dash on Fremont. He
is now swinging down the valley--a new danger to Maxime.

What means all this? The perplexed Don knows not what to do. From his outposts come menacing
news. The battery of the PORTSMOUTH commands the town of Yerba Buena. San Diego, too, is under
American guns. The CYANE is victorious there, and the CONGRESS holds San Pedro. The political
fabric is so slight that its coming fall gives no sign. The veteran Commandante receives an
order to march, with every available man, to join General Castro. He feels even his own domains
are now in danger. He communes long with the padre. He musters every vaquero for their last
campaign under the Mexican eagle.

Miguel Peralta growls with rage. He learns the English liner COLLINGWOOD has arrived, a day
or so too late--only another enemy. Still, better temporary English rule than the long reign
of the grasping Yankee. The Don's self-interest, in alarm, is in the logical right this time.

How shall he protect his property? What will he do with his family? He knows that behind him
the great Sierras wall the awful depths of the Yosemite. The gloomy forests of the big trees
appall the stray traveller. The Utes are merciless in the day of their advantage, and the American
war vessels cut off all escape by sea to Mexico. All the towns near the ocean are rendezvous
of defiant foreigners, now madly exultant. To the north is the enemy he is going out to fight.

Padre Francisco advises him to leave the rancho in his charge. He begs him to even let the
young American prisoner remain.

Lagunitas may be seized, yet private property will be respected. Young Valois may be a help
to considerate treatment. After council with his frightened spouse, Don Miguel rides off to
the rendezvous near Santa Clara. He curbs his passion from prudence only, for he was on the
point of making Valois a human tassel for a live-oak limb.

The padre breaths freer.

Day after day elapses. Under a small body-guard both the padre and Maxime ride the domain in
freedom. Juanita Peralta shuts herself up in the gloomy mansion, where she tells her beads
in the shadow of the coming defeats.

Rich and lovely Lagunitas is yet out of the theatre of action. Its lonely inhabitants hear
of the now rapid march of events, but only defeated riders wander in with heavy tidings.

Fremont has whirled back once more and controls Suiter's Fort and Sonoma. The ablest general
of California is powerless. Gallant Vallejo is now a prisoner. His scanty cannons and arms
are all taken. Castro's cavalry are broken up or captured. Everywhere the foreigners gather
for concerted action. It is a partisan warfare.

Don Miguel's sullen bulletins tell of Castro's futile attempt to get north of the bay. Since
Cabrillo was foiled in landing at Mendocino in 1543, the first royal flag floating over this
"No Man's Land" was Good Queen Bess's standard, set up in 1579 by dashing Sir Francis Drake.
He landed from the Golden Hind. In 1602 the Spanish ensign floated on December 10 at Monterey;
in 1822 the third national ensign was unfurled, the beloved Mexican eagle-bearing banner. It
now flutters to its downfall.

Don Miguel warns the padre that the rude "bear flag" of the revolted foreigners victoriously
floats at Sonoma. It was raised on July 4, 1846. Castro and Pio Pico are driven away from the
coast. They only hold the Santa Clara valley and the interior. There is but one depot of arms
in the country now; it is a hidden store at San Juan. Far away in Illinois, a near relative
of the painter and hoister of the "bear flag" is a struggling lawyer. Todd's obscure boyhood
friend, Abraham Lincoln, is destined to be the martyr ruler of the United States. A new star
will shine in the stars and stripes for California, in a bloody civil war, far off yet in the
mystic future.

In the narrow theatre where the decaying Latin system is falling, under Anglo-Saxon self-assertion,
the stern logic of events teaches Don Miguel better lessons. His wild riders may as well sheathe
their useless swords as fight against fate.

The first blood is drawn at Petaluma. A declaration of independence, rude in form, but grimly
effective in scope, is given out by the "bear flag" party. Fremont joins and commands them.
The Presidio batteries at San Francisco are spiked by Fremont and daring Kit Carson, The cannon
and arms of Castro are soon taken. On July 7, Captain Mervine, with two hundred and fifty blue-jackets,
raises the flag of the United States at Monterey. Its hills reecho twenty-one guns in salvo
from Sloat's squadron.

On the 8th, Montgomery throws the national starry emblem to the breeze at the Golden Gates
of San Francisco. The old PORTSMOUTH'S heavy cannon roar their notes of triumph.

Valois remains lonely and inactive at Lagunitas. His priestly friend warns him that he would
be assassinated at any halting place if he tried to join his friends. In fact, he conceals
his presence from any wayfaring, Yankee-hunting guerillas.

Don Miguel is bound by his military oath to keep the field. A returning straggler brings the
crushing news that the San Juan military depot has been captured by a smart dash of the American
volunteers under Fremont and Gillespie. And San Diego has fallen now. The bitter news of the
Mexican War is heard from the Rio Grande. A new sorrow!

Broken-hearted Don Miguel bravely clings to his flag. He marches south with Castro and Pico,
The long weeks wear along. The arrival of General Kearney, and the occupation of San Diego
and Los Angeles, are the prelude to the last effort made for the honor of the Mexican ensign.
Months drag away. The early winter finds Don Miguel still missing. Commodore Stockton, now
in command of the powerful fleet, reinforces Fremont and Gillespie. The battles of San Gabriel
and the Mesa teach the wild Californians what bitter foes their invaders can be. The treaty
of Coenga at last ends the unequal strife. The stars and stripes wave over the yet unmeasured
boundaries of the golden West. The Dons are in the conquerors' hands. After the fatal day of
January 16, 1847, defeated and despairing of the future of his race, war-worn Miguel Peralta,
Commandante no longer, with a few followers rides over the Tehachape. He descends the San Joaquin
to his imperilled domain.

With useless valor he has thrown himself into the fire of the Americans at the battles near
Los Angeles, but death will not come to him. He must live to be one of the last Dons. The defeats
of Mexico sadden and embitter him. General Scott is fighting up to the old palaces of the Montezumas
with his ever victorious army.

In these stormy winter days, when the sheeted rain drives down from the pine-clad Sierras,
Donna Juanita day by day turns her passive face in mute inquiry to the padre. She has the sense
of a new burden to bear. Her narrow nature contracts yet a little with a sense of wounded native
pride.

In all her wedded years her martial lord has always returned in victory. Fandango and feast,
"baile" and rejoicings, have made the woodland echoes ring.

The growing Dolores mopes in the lonely mansion. She demands her absent father daily.

Before the troopers of Lagunitas return with their humbled chieftain, a squad of mounted American
volunteers ride up and take possession. For the first time in its history the foreigner is
master here, Though personally unknown to these mixed revolutionists, Maxime Valois is free
to go in safety.

While he makes acquaintance with his fellow "patriots," the advance riders of Don Miguel announce
his home-coming. It is a sad day when the Commandante dismounts at his own door. There is a
sentinel there. He lives to be only a sullen, brooding protest in the face of an accidental
progress.

Standing on his porch he can see the "mozos," under requisition, gathering up his choicest
horses by the fifties. They are destined for the necessary remount of the victors.

After greeting his patient helpmeet, henceforth to be the partner of his sorrows, he sends
for the padre and his major-domo. He takes on himself the only dignity left to his defeated
pride, practical self-isolation.

He bears in his bosom this rankling thorn--the hated Fremont he rode out to bring in a captive,
is now "His Excellency John C. Fremont," the first American governor of California.

With his flocks and herds scattered, his cattle and horses under heavy requisition, his cup
is full. He moodily curses the Gringo, and wishes that the rifle-ball which wounded him at
San Gabriel had reached the core of his proud old heart.

From all sides come fugitives with news of the Americanization of the towns. The inland communities
are reorganized. His only friend is the Padre, to whose patient ear he confides the story of
the hopeless campaign. With prophetic pessimism he sees the downfall of the native families.

Three months have made Larkin, Redding, Ide, Sutter, Semple, Merritt, Bidwell, Leese, and Lassen
the leading men of the day. The victorious military and naval chiefs, Sloat, Stockton, Montgomery,
Fremont, Kearney, Halleck, and Gillespie are now men of history. All the functions of government
are in the hands of American army or navy officers. The fall of the beloved Mexican banner
is as light and unmarked as the descent of the drifting pine-needles torn from the swaying
branches of the storm-swept forest kings around him.

His settled gloom casts a shadow over Lagunitas. The padre has lost his scholars. The converts
of the dull Indian tribes have fled to the hills, leaving the major-domo helpless. All is in
domestic anarchy. At last the volunteers are leaving.

When the detachment is ready to depart, Maxime Valois is puzzled. The Mexican War raging, prevents
his homeward voyage as planned. It will be months before the war vessels will sail. If allowed
to embark on them, he will be left, after doubling Cape Horn, a stranger in the north, penniless.
Why not stay?

Yet the shelter of Lagunitas is his no more. The maddened Don will not see an American on the
bare lands left to him. His herds and flocks are levied on to feed the troops.

Many an hour does the youth confer with Francois Ribaut. The priest is dependent on his patron.
The Church fabric is swept away, for Church and state went down together. With only one friend
in the State, Valois must now quit his place of enforced idleness.

The meagre news tells him the Fremont party is scattered. He has no claims on the American
Government. But Fremont has blossomed into a governor. He will seek him. Happily, while Maxime
Valois deliberates, the question decides itself. He is offered the hospitality of an escort
back to Santa Clara, from whence he can reach Monterey, San Francisco, or Los Angeles. In the
new State no present avenues are open to a castaway. His education is practically useless.
He is forced to consider the question of existence. The utmost Padre Francisco can do is to
provide him horse and gear. A few Mexican dollars for the road are not lacking. The lot of
fate is drawn for him by necessity. For the present he must be a Californian. He cannot leave
until the future provides the means.

When the vigil of the departure comes, the young man is loath to leave his friend. In their
companionship they have grown dear to each other.

The camp of the volunteers is ready for the next day's march. At their last dinner, the simple
cheer of the native wine and a few cigaritos is all the padre can display.

"Maxime, listen. You are young and talented," the padre begins. "I see a great community growing
up here, This is a land of promise. The termination of the war ends all tumult. Your fleet
holds the coast. Mexico seems to be under the talons of your eagle. Your nation is aggressive.
It is of high mechanical skill. Your people will pour into this land and build here a great
empire. Your busy Yankees will never be satisfied with the skeleton wealth of a pastoral life.
They will dig, hew, and build. These bays and rivers will be studded with cities. Go, my dear
friend, to Yerba Buena. I will give you letters to the fathers of the Mission Dolores. Heaven
will direct you after you arrive. You can communicate with me through them. I shall remain
here as long as my charge continues. If driven out, I shall trust God to safely guide me to
France. When I am worn out, I shall die in peace under the shadows of Notre Dame."

At the hour of mass Maxime kneels to receive the blessing of the Church.

The volunteers are in the saddle. It is the man, not the priest, who embraces the freed "pathfinder."
Valois' eyes are dim with tears as he waves the adieu to the missionary. Not a word does Don
Miguel vouchsafe to the departing squad. The aversion of the dwellers in Lagunitas is as great
as their chief's.

Maxime joins the escort on the trail. Runaway sailors, voyageurs, stray adventurers are they--queer
flotsam on the sea of human life. He learns from them the current stories of the day. He can
trace in the mysterious verbal "order to return," and that never-produced "packet" given to
Fremont by Gillespie, a guiding influence from afar. The appearance of the strong fleet and
the hostilities of Captain Fremont are mysteriously connected. Was it from Washington these
wonders were worked? As they march, unopposed, over the alamedas of San Joaquin, bearing toward
the Coast Range, they pass under overhanging Mount Diablo. The Louisianian marvels at the sudden
change of so many peaceful explorers into conquering invaders. Valois suspects Senator Benton
of intrigues toward western conquest. He knows not that somewhere, diplomatically lost between
President Polk and Secretaries Buchanan, Marcy, and Bancroft, is the true story of this seizure
of California. Gillespie's orders were far in advance of any Mexican hostilities. The fleet
and all the actions of the State, War, and Navy departments prove that some one in high place
knew the Pacific Coast would be subdued and held.

Was it for slavery's added domains these glorious lands were destined?

Maxime is only a pawn in that great game of which the annexation of Texas, the Mexican War,
and California conquest are moves.

Wise, subtle, far-seeing, and not over-scrupulous, the leaders of southern sentiment, with
prophetic alarm, were seeking to neutralize free-State extension in the Northwest. They wished
to link the warmer climes, newly acquired, to the Union by negro chains. Joying in his freedom,
eager to meet the newer phases of Californian life under the stars and stripes, Valois rides
along. Restored in health, and with the light heart and high hopes of twenty, he threads the
beautiful mountain passes; for the first time he sees the royal features of San Francisco Bay,
locked by the Golden Gates.

Maxine Valois marvels not that the old navigators missed the Golden Gate. It was easy to pass
the land-locked bay, with its arterial rivers, the Sacramento and San Joaquin. Fate hung a
foggy curtain on the outside bar. Greenest velvet sward now carpets the Alameda hills. It is
a balmy March day of 1847. The proceeds of his horse and trappings give the youth less than
a hundred dollars--his whole fortune.

The Louisianian exile, with the world before him, is now a picture of manly symmetry. Graceful,
well-knit physique, dark hair and eyes, and his soft, impassioned speech, betray the Franco-American
of the Gulf States. While gazing on the glories of Tamalpais and the wooded mountains of Marin,
he notes the little mission under the Visitacion hills. It's a glorious scene. All the world's
navies can swing at ease in this superb bay. The only banner floating here is the ensign at
the peak of the frigate Portsmouth. Interior wanderings give him a glimpse of the vast areas
controlled by this noble sheet of water. Young and ardent, with a superior education, he may
be a ruling spirit of the new State now about to crystallize. His studies prove how strangely
the finger of Fortune points. It turned aside the prows of Captain Cook, La Perouse, Vancouver,
and the great Behring, as well as the bold Drake, who tarried within a day's sail at his New
Albion. Frenchman, Englishman, and Russian have been tricked by the fairy goddess of the mist.
The Golden Gates in these later days are locked by the Yankees from the inside.

Leaping from the boat, Valois tosses his scanty gear on the strand. It is a deep, curving bay,
in later years to be covered with stately palaces of commerce, far out to where the Portsmouth
now lies.

A few huts make up the city of Yerba Buena. Reflecting on his status, he dares not seek the
alcalde, Lieut. Washington Bartlett of the navy. From his escort he has heard of the many bickerings
which have involved Sloat, Stockton, Fremont, and Kearney.

Trusting to Padre Francisco's letters, he hires a horse of a loitering half-breed. This native
pilots him to the mission.

The priests receive him with open arms. They are glad for news of their brother of the Sierras.
Maxime installs himself as a guest of the priests. Some current of life will bear him onward--whither
he knows not.

Idle days run into weeks. A motley five or six hundred whites have gathered. The alcalde begins
to fear that the town limits are crowded.

None of the wise men of the epoch dare to dream that in less than three years two hundred vessels
will lie tossing, deserted in the bay; that the cove will be filled with ships from the four
corners of the earth in five years.

Frowning hills and rolling sand dunes are to be thrown bodily into the reentrant bay. They
are future coverings for sunken hulks. Where for twenty square miles coyote and fox now howl
at night, the covert oaks and brambles will be shaved off to give way to a city, growing like
a cloud-land vision.

Active and energetic, Valois coasts down to Monterey. He finds Fremont gone, already on his
way east. His soldier wrists are bound with the red tape of arrest. The puppet of master minds
behind the scenes, Fremont has been a "pathfinder" for others.

Riding moodily, chafing in arrest, at the rear of the overland column, the explorer receives
as much as Columbus, Pizarro, or Maluspina did--only obloquy. It is the Nemesis of disgrace,
avenging the outraged and conquered Californians.

A dark shade of double dealing hangs around the glories of the capture of California. The methods
used are hardly justified, even by the national blessings of extension to this ocean threshold
of Asian trade. The descent was planned at Washington to extend the domineering slave empire
of the aspiring South. The secret is out. The way is clear for the surplus blacks of the South
to march in chains to the Pacific under the so-called "flag of freedom."

Valois discovers at Monterey that no man of the staff of the "Pathfinder" will be made an official
pet, They are all proscribed. The early fall finds him again under the spell of the bells of
the Mission Dolores. Whither to turn he knows not.

Averse to manual labor, like all Creoles, the lad decides to seek a return passage on some
trader. This will be hardly possible for months. The Christmas chimes of 1848 sound sadly on
his ears.

With no home ties but his uncle, his memories of the parents, lost in youth, fade away. He
feels the bitterness of being a stranger in a strange land. He is discouraged with an isolated
western empire producing nothing but hides and tallow. He shares the general opinion that no
agriculture can succeed in this rainless summer land of California. Hardly a plough goes afield.
On the half-neglected ranchos the owners of thousands of cattle have neither milk nor butter.
Fruits and vegetables are unattainable. The mission grapes, olives, and oranges have died out
by reason of fourteen years' neglect. The mechanic arts are absent. What shall the harvest
of this idle land be?

Valois knows the interior Indians will never bear the strain of development. Lazy and ambitionless,
they are incapable of uniting their tribal forces. Alas for them! They merely cumber the ground.

At the end of January, 1848, a wild commotion agitates the hamlet of San Francisco. The cry
is "Gold! Gold everywhere!" The tidings are at first whispered, then the tale swells to a loud
clamor. In the stampede for the interior, Maxime Valois is borne away. He seeks the Sacramento,
the Feather, the Yuba, and the American. He too must have gold.

A general hegira occurs. Incoming ships, little settlements, and the ranches are all deserted,
for a wondrous golden harvest is being gleaned. The tidings go forth over the whole earth.
Sail and steam, trains of creaking wagons, troops of hardy horsemen, are all bent Westward
Ho! Desertion takes the troops and sailors from camp and fleet pell-mell to the Sacramento
valley. A shabby excrescence of tent and hut swells Yerba Buena to a town. In a few months
it leaps into a city's rank. Over the prairies, toward the sandy Humboldt, long emigrant trains
are crawling toward the golden canyons of the Sierras. The restless blood of the Mexican War
pours across the Gila deserts and the sandy wastes of the Colorado.

The Creole boy learns that he, too, can work with pick, pan, cradle, rocker, at the long tom,
sluice, and in the tunnel drift. The money and time spent in spraying is also well invested. The New
York Agricultural Experiment Station began a ten-year experiment in potato-spraying to determine
how much the yield can be increased by spraying with Pyrox or with Bordeaux mixture.

In 1904 the gain due to spraying was larger than ever before. Five sprayings with Bordeaux increased
the yield 233 bushels per acre, while three sprayings increased it
191 bushels.

The gain was due chiefly to the prolongation of growth through the prevention of late blight.
The sprayed potatoes contained one ninth more starch and were of better quality.

The average increase of profit per acre from spraying potatoes was figured to be about $22 on
each acre. The result was arrived at from experiment, two thirds of which was by independent
farmers.

(Particulars will be found In Bulletin No. 264, issued by the Department.)

In fourteen farmers' business experiments, including 18 acres of potatoes, the average gain due
to spraying was 62-1/2 bushels per acre, the average total cost of
spraying 93 cents per acre; and the average net profit, based on the
market price of potatoes at digging time, $24.86 per acre.

"One class of gardeners," Burnet Landreth explains, "may be termed experimental farmers, men tired
of the humdrum rotation of farm processes and small profits, men looking for a paying diversification
of their agricultural interests. Their expenses for appliances are not great, as they have
already on hand the usual stock of farm tools, requiring only one
or two seed drills, a small addition to their cultivating implements,
and a few tons of fertilizers.

Their laborers and teams are always on hand for the working of moderate areas. In addition to
the usual expense of the farm, they would not need to have a cash
capital of beyond 20 to 25 dollars per acre for the area in truck."

"Other men, purchasing or renting land, especially for market gardening,
taking only improved land of suitable aspect, soil, and situation,
and counting in cost of building, appliances, and labor, would require
a capital of $80 to $100 per acre.

For example, a beginner in market gardening in South Jersey, on a five-acre patch, would need
$500 to set up the business, and run it until his shipments began to return him money. With
the purpose of securing information on this interesting point, the writer asked for estimates from
market gardeners in different localities, and the result has been that from Florida the reports
of the necessary capital per acre, in land or its rental (not of labor), fertilizers, tools,
implements, seed and all the appliances, average $95, from Texas
$45, from Illinois $70, from the Norfolk district of Virginia the
reports vary from $75 to $125, according to location, and from Long
Island, New York, the average of estimates at the east end is $75,
and at the west end $150."

I have before me now one of the roseate advertisements, which we so often see in the newspapers,
telling how fortunes can be made by investing a few dollars in a tropical plantation in Mexico.

It
gives what are supposed to be startling yields per acre, and yet
the returns, which must necessarily be taken with considerable allowance,
are only from $580 to $1087 per acre on various plantations.

There are market gardeners and nurserymen near New York City who are making their acres produce
better returns than this.

It is not necessary to go off into the tropical wilderness seeking a fortune which is usually a
gold brick that some fellow is trying to sell you, when as good results can be secured right
at home.

Market gardeners in and near Philadelphia pay $25 to $50 an acre and upwards rent for land, and
work from five to forty acres. This is as much as similar land in many parts of the country could
be bought for. But it is not a high rent when they are right at the market--one man makes the
round trip in two and one half hours--manure costs them nothing--for
years they have been using the excavations from the old style privy
wells, which has been hauled to their farm and deposited where they
wished it, free.

They have modern facilities, such as trolley and telephone, and are as much city men as any
clerk in an office. They clear far higher profits from an acre than the average farmer, raising
never less than two, and often three crops in a season. They employ several men to the acre, and
at certain times many more, working the men in gangs.

Only the difficulty of getting good help at their prices prevents them from using twice the number.

However,
the possibilities of putting capital into land at a profit are still infinite.

What chiefly attracts the gardener to the great cities is stable manure;
this is not wanted so much for increasing the richness of the soil--one
ninth part of the manure used by the French gardeners would do for
that purpose--but for keeping the soil at a certain temperature.

Early vegetables pay best, and in order to obtain early produce, not only the air, but the soil
as well, must be warmed; that is done by putting great quantities of properly mixed manure into
the soil; its fermentation heats it. But with the present development of industrial skill, heating
the soil could be done more economically and more easily by hot-water pipes. Consequently, the
French gardeners begin more and more to make use of portable pipes,
or thermosiphons, provisionally established in the cool frames.

Competition that stands in with the railroads can be met only by being near the market or having
water transportation. Indeed, the erect of water transportation in getting manure, and in delivering
the produce from the railroads, appears in the early history of trucking. The railroads often
crush out boat competition by absorbing docks and standing in with the commission men. This could
be met by such cooperative selling agencies as the flower growers already have.

"One of the earliest centers for the development of truck farming in its present sense was along
the shores of Chesapeake Bay, where fast sailing oyster boats were employed for sending the
produce to the neighboring markets of Baltimore and Philadelphia. In a similar way the gardeners
about New York early began pushing out along Long Island, using the waters of the Sound for
transporting their produce.

The trucking region on the eastern shore of Lake Michigan is another sample of the effect
of convenient water transportation in causing an early development of this industry. The building
of the Illinois Central railroad opened up a region in southern Illinois that was supposed to
be particularly adapted to fruit growing." ("Development of the Trucking Interests," by F.
S. Earle, page 439.)

If one goes into the trucking business on so large a scale as to be
able to make deals with the railroads, such as The Standard Oil Company
has made, of course additional prices could be gotten, owing to the
possibility of putting competitors at a disadvantage.

That business is a large one.

In doing business on this scale, much will depend on your ability as a merchant.

"It is useless to grow good crops unless they can be sold at a profit; yet it is safe to say that
ten men grow good truck crops for one who markets them to the best advantage."

Three Acres and Liberty: Ch. XI-XV

CHAPTER XI

HOTBEDS AND GREENHOUSES

Whether to get an early start on the garden or for raising plants
for field crops, a hotbed is all but indispensable.

In making a hotbed what we seek to do is to imitate Nature at her best, so get the best soil and
the sunniest spot you can find.

In all hotbeds the underlying principle is the same: They are right-angled boxes covered with
glass panes set in movable frames and placed over heated excavations. The bed may be of any size
or shape, but the standard one is six feet wide, since the stock
glass frames are usually six feet long by three feet wide.

You can have any length needed to supply your requirements.

"Tomato Culture," by A. J. Root, tells us that the cheapest plan is to get some old planks, broken
brickbats or stone, and piece together a box-like affair in proper shape: to provide drainage,
the front should be at least ten inches above the ground and the rear fourteen inches. A hotbed
knocked together in this way is all right to start with, if you cannot do any better, but will
last only two or three seasons. For a permanent bed, probably the best way is to make cement
walls extending to the bottom of the manure. The bed ought to face
south or southeast and be well protected on the north.

It should be banked all around with earth or straw to keep out the cold, and mats or shutters
should be provided for extra cold weather.

The best material for heating the bed and the most easily obtained, is fresh horse manure in
which there is a quantity of straw or litter.

This will give out a slow, moist heat and will not burn out before the crops or the plants mature.
Get all the manure you need at one time. Pile it in a dry place and let it ferment; every
few days work the pile over thoroughly with a dung fork; sometimes two turnings of the manure
are enough, but it is better to let it stand and heat three or four times.

"You can make a hotbed also on top of the ground without any excavation. Spread a layer of manure
evenly one foot in depth and large enough to extend around the frame three feet each way. Pack
this down well, especially around the edge, put on a second and third layer until you have a
well-trodden and compact bed of manure at least two and one half feet in depth. Place the frame
in the center of this bed and press it down well."

A two-inch layer of decayed leaves, cut straw, or corn fodder, spread over the manure in the frame
and well packed down, will help to retain the heat. Ventilate the bed every day to allow steam
and ammonia fumes to pass off.

"The soil inside should be equal parts of garden loam and well-rotted barnyard manure. Tramp
well the first layer of three inches. To make it entirely safe for the plant seeds in the hotbed,
add another layer of the same depth. Use no water with garden loam and manure if you can possibly
help it."

"Before sowing any seeds put a thermometer in the bed three inches
deep in the soil.

If it runs over 80 degrees Fahrenheit, do not sow. If below 55 degrees it is too cold; you will
have to fork it over and add more manure. If the bed gets too hot, you can ventilate it with a
sharp stick by thrusting it down into the soil."

Another way that the old gardeners have to make a hot bed is with fire. On a large scale this
is cheaper, though more complicated than the fermentation of manure. In making this kind choose
your location and build the frames as before. "Cut a trench with a slight taper from the east
end of the plot to the end of the hotbed, and on under the ground to about four feet beyond
the end of the bed. This taper to the outlet will create a draught and so keep a better fire.
Arch this over with vitrified tile. The furnace end where the fire is should be about six feet
away from the bed. When the trenches are completed, cover over with the dirt that was taken
out of them. Two such trenches under the frames will make a good
hotbed. Anyone can do this sort of work."

A hotbed can also be heated by running steam pipes through the ground, but unless you happen to
be where exhaust steam could be used, this method is not economical except for big houses. The
care and expense of a separate steam plant would be too great to
pay, unless for growing winter vegetables for market or flower culture.

If you go into that on a scale large enough to pay, new problems at once demand solution.

Vegetables under glass have kept pace with other crops.

Within fifteen miles of Boston are millions of square feet of glass devoted to vegetables,
chiefly lettuce. There are more than five million feet in the United States used for other crops.
Ordinarily, under favorable conditions, glass devoted to this work will yield an average of fifty
cents per year per square foot.

About the lowest estimate of cost per sash is five dollars; this amount includes the cost of one
fourth of the frame and covers. There are usually four sashes to one frame. A well-made mortised
plank frame costs four to six dollars. A sash, unglazed, costs from one to two dollars. Glazing
costs seventy-five cents. Mats and shutters cost from fifty cents to two dollars per sash, depending
upon the material used. Double thick glass pays better in the end as being less liable to breakage.
These prices vary greatly, however.

The following sample estimate by a gardener is for a market garden of one acre, in which it is
desired to grow a general line of vegetables. It supposes that half of the acre is to be set with
plants from hotbeds.

One eighth acre to early cauliflower and cabbage, about 2000 plants, if transplanted, would require
two 6 X 12 frames, from two hundred to two hundred and fifty plants being grown under each sash.

These
frames may be used again for tomato plants for the same area, using about 450 plants. This will allow
a sash for every 55 plants.

One frame should be in use at the same time for eggplants and peppers, two sashes of each, growing
fifty transplanted plants under each sash.

Two frames will be required for cucumbers, melons, and early squashes;
for extra early lettuce, an estimate of sixty to seventy heads should
be made to a sash.

It is assumed that celery and late cabbages are to be started in seed beds in the open.

In the fashionable suburbs of Boston "one hotbed 3 X 6 feet was used in which to start the seeds of
early vegetables. Plantings were made in the open ground as soon as the weather permitted, and
were continued at intervals throughout the season whenever there was a vacant spot in the garden.
The following varieties of vegetables, mostly five-and ten-cent packets, were planted: Pole
and wax beans, beets, kale, cabbage, carrots, cauliflower, celery, corn, cucumbers, corn salad,
endive, eggplant, kohlrabi, lettuce, muskmelon, onions, peppers,
peas, salsify, radish, spinach, squash, tomatoes, turnips, rutabagas,
escarole, chives, shallot, parsley, sweet and Irish potatoes, and
nearly a dozen different kinds of sweet herbs."

"In the larger garden, tomatoes followed peas, turnips the wax beans, early lettuce for fall use
took the place of Refugee beans.

Corn salad succeeded lettuce."

"The spinach was followed by cabbage, while turnips, beets, carrots,
celery, and spinach gave a second crop in the plot occupied by Gardus
peas and Emperor William beans."

"Winter radishes came after telephone peas, Paris Golden celery was planted in between the hills
of Stowell's blanching. The plot of early corn was sown to turnips. The hotbed was used during the
late fall and winter to store some of the hardy vegetables, and the latter part of October there
was placed in it some endive, escarole, celeriac, and the remaining
space was filled up by transplanting leeks, chives, and parsley."

(Bailey, "Principles of Vegetable Gardening," page 38.)

"If spinach is grown in frames, the sash used for one of the late crops above may be used through
the following winter.

"This, like the last case, makes a total of five frames, the cost, depending on make and material, from
one to five dollars; twenty sash and covers, at, say, $2.75, $55; manure at market price,
calculating at least three or four loads per frame.

This is a liberal estimate of space, and should allow for all ordinary loss of plants, and for
discarding the weak and inferior ones. It supposes that most or all of the plants are to be
transplanted once or more in the frames. Many gardeners have less equipment of glass." (Same,
pages 49-50 )

Growing vegetables under glass gives smaller returns than flowers; as, for instance, a head
of lettuce brings much less than a plant of carnations, and suffers more from the competition
of southern crops. Nevertheless, the greenhouse-grown vegetables have come into prominence
lately because they can be raised in houses that are not good enough for flowers. Lettuce and
tomatoes are the principal crops; some growers raise thousands of
dollars' worth each year.

The greenhouse is also used for forcing plants which are afterwards transplanted to the open
air.

This develops them at a time when they could not grow outdoors and gives them such a start that they
are very early on the market, thereby realizing the highest prices.

"Nearness to market is the most important feature in a greenhouse. In large cities, manure, which
is the chief fertilizer, can be had in most cases for the hauling. The short haul is an important
item, and, most important of all, the gardener who is near the market can take advantage of high
prices, if the grower is near enough to the city to make two or three trips; in such a fluctuating
market as New York, it is to his advantage."

Some kind of a greenhouse is necessary, but one large enough to produce a living would cost a very large
sum.

Vegetable raising under glass has been made profitable in special localities where nearly the
whole community gives its time to building up the industry, but complete success can be attained
only by having absolute control of all the conditions entering into production, and giving
assiduous and undivided attention to detail.

Leonard Barron, in the Garden Magazine, says: "The best type of greenhouse for all-round purposes
is unquestionably what is known as the even span--that is, a house
in which the roof is in the form of an inverted V, so as to be exposed
as much as possible to sunlight, and having the ridge-pole in the
center.

All other types of houses are modifications from the simplest form, and are designed in some
way or other to fit some special requirements. These requirements may be: the cultural necessities
for some particular crop; a desire to have the atmospheric conditions
inside more or less abnormal at given seasons (as in a forcing house);
or an adaptation to some peculiarity of the situation, as when a greenhouse
is built as an adjunct to other buildings."

"It is plain common sense
that the ideal greenhouse is one in which the light is most nearly
that which exists outside, and in which the heat is as evenly distributed.
It is practical experience that a structure with as few angles and
turns m it as possible and with a minimum of woodwork in its superstructure,
best answers these conditions.... Greenhouse building has developed
into a special industry, and the modern American greenhouse is the
highest type of construction. It is built with as careful calculation
to its situation and its requirements as is the country dwellinghouse.
Such a thing naturally is not cheap."

"The low-priced 'cheap greenhouse'
is a makeshift of some sort. Perhaps its roof is constructed of hotbed
sash, a perfectly feasible method of construction, which for ordinary,
commonplace gardening will answer admirably. Or, its foundation is
merely the plain earth. Such a building does admirably in the summer
time, and even in the late spring and early autumn; but woe betide
the enthusiastic amateur in winter, who, being possessed of one of
these light greenhouse structures, has indulged in a few costly, exotic
plants. They will be frozen, to a certainty! It is economy to pay
a fair price in the beginning to secure a properly built greenhouse
that will withstand the trials of winter."

"If iron frame is used
instead of wood there is greater durability, and the structure being
more slender, will admit more light, but the cost will be increased."

"It
makes very little difference in cost what shape of house is to be
erected. The cost per lineal foot for an even span is practically
the same as for a lean-to of the same length and width. In the lean-to,
in order to get the sufficient bench and walk space inside, it is
necessary to carry the roof to a point much higher than in the even
span. The extra framework and material for the roof cost a good deal,
yet add practically nothing to the efficiency of the house."

"Heating
of greenhouses is best done by hot water, and in a small house the
pipes may well be connected with the heating system used for the dwelling,
if the greenhouse and the home are within any sort of reasonable distance
from each other. For large houses, or ranges of several houses together,
the independent heating plant is necessary. Steam is used for heating
by commercial florists, but it is economical only on a large scale."

"As
a uniform temperature must be maintained in the house, the fires,
where steam is used, need watching continuously during cold weather,
for the moment the water ceases to boil, the pipes cool off and a
considerable time is consumed in starting the heat running again.
With hot water there is much more latitude in attention, for though
the fires dwindle' the water which fills the pipes will carry heat
for a long time, and it will circulate until the last degree is radiated.
 First, the old
pearl-fishers in the gulf of California; then the pirates lurking along the coast, watching
the Philippine galleons. When your Americans overran Texas, and commenced to pour over the
plains here, we knew all was lost. Your people have fought a needless war with Mexico; now
they are swarming in here--a godless race, followed by outcasts of the whole of Europe. There
is no law here but the knife and pistol. Your hordes now arriving have but one god alone--gold."

The saddened old padre sighs as he gathers his breviary and beads, seeking his lonely cloister.
He is a spectre of a day that is done.

CHAPTER VI.

LIGHTING FREEDOM'S WESTERN LAMP.

Bustling crowds confuse Valois when he rides through San Francisco next day. One year's Yankee
dominion shows a progress greater than the two hundred and forty-six years of Spanish and Mexican
ownership. The period since Viscaino's sails glittered off Point Reyes has been only stagnation.

Seventy-three years' droning along under mission rule has ended in vain repetition of spiritual
adjurations to the dullard Indians. To-day hammer and saw, the shouts of command, the din of
trade, the ships of all nations, and the whistle, tell of the new era of work. The steam engine
is here. The age of faith is past. "Laborare est orare" is the new motto. Adios, siesta! Enter,
speculation.

Dreamy-eyed senoritas in amazement watch the growing town. Hundreds are throwing the drifted
sand dunes into the shallow bay to create level frontage. Swarthy riders growl a curse as they
see the lines of city lot fences stretching toward the Presidio, mission, and potrero.

Inventive Americans live on hulks and flats, anchored over water lots. The tide ebbs and flows,
yet deep enough to drown the proprietors on their own tracts, purchased at auction of the alcalde
as "water lots."

Water lots, indeed! Twenty years will see these water lots half a mile inland.

Masonry palaces will find foundations far out beyond where the old CYANE now lies. Her grinning
ports hold Uncle Sam's hushed thunder-bolts. It is the downfall of the old REGIME.

Shed, tent, house, barrack, hut, dug-out, ship's cabin--everything which will cover a head
from the salt night fog is in service. The Mexican adobe house disappears. Pretentious hotels
and storehouses are quickly run up in wood. The mails are taking orders to the East for completed
houses to come "around the Horn." Sheet-iron buildings are brought from England. A cut stone
granite bank arrives in blocks from far-off China.

Vessels with flour from Chile, goods from Australia, and supplies from New York and Boston
bring machinery and tools. Flour, saw, and grist mills are provided. Every luxury is already
on the way from Liverpool, Bordeaux, Havre, Hamburg, Genoa, and Glasgow. These vessels bring
swarms of natives of every clime. They hasten to a land where all are on an equal footing of
open adventure, a land where gold is under every foot.

Without class, aristocracy, history, or social past, California's "golden days" are of the future.

Strange that in thirty years' residence of the sly Muscovites at Fort Ross, in the long, idle
leisure of the employees of the Hudson Bay station at Yerba Buena Cove from 1836 to 1846, even
with the astute Swiss Captain Sutter at New Helvetia, all capacities of the fruitful land have
been so strangely ignored.

The slumber of two hundred and fifty years is over. Frenchman, Russian, Englishman, what opiate's
drowsy charms dulled your eager eyes so long here? Thousands of miles of virgin lands, countless
millions of treasures, royal forests and hills yet to grow under harvest of olive and vine--all
this the mole-like eyes of the olden days have never seen.

Even the Mormons acted with the supine ignorance of the foreigners. They scorned to pick this
jewel up. Judicious Brigham Young from the Great Salt Lake finally sends emissaries to spy
and report. Like the wind his swift messengers go east to divert strong battalions of the Mormon
converts from Europe, under trusted leaders, to San Francisco. Can he extend his self-built
empire to the Pacific Slope? Brigham may be a new Mahomet, a newer Napoleon, for he has the
genius of both.

Alas! when the Mormon bands arrive, Sam Brannard, their leader, abandons the new creed of "Mormon"
for the newer creed of "Mammon." He becomes a mercantile giant. The disciples scatter as gold-seekers.
California is lost to the Mormons. Even so! Fate, providence, destiny, or some cold evolution
of necessary order, draws up the blue curtains of the West. It pins them to our country's flag
with a new, glittering star, "California."

With eager interest Valois joins Philip Hardin. There is a social fever in the air. His friends
are all statesmen in this chrysalis of territorial development. They are old hands at political
intrigue. They would modestly be senators, governors, and rulers. They would cheerfully serve
a grateful State.

A band of sturdy cavaliers, they ride out, down the bay shores. They cross the Santa Clara
and Salinas valleys toward Monterey.

Valois' easy means enable him to be a leader of the movement. It is to give a constitution
and laws to the embryo State.

Hardy men from the West and South are taking up lands. Cool traders are buying great tracts.
Temporary officials have eager eyes fixed on the Mexican grants. At all the landings and along
the new roads, once trails, little settlements are springing up, for your unlucky argonaut
turns to the nearest avocation; inns, stables, lodging-houses and trading-tents are waited
on by men of every calling and profession. Each wanderer turns to the easiest way of amassing
wealth. The settlers must devise all their own institutions. The Mexicans idly wrap their serapes
around them, and they avoid all contact with the hated foreigner. Beyond watching their flocks
and herds, they take no part in the energetic development. Cigarito in mouth, card playing
or watching the sports of the mounted cavaliers are their occupations. Dismounted in future
years, these queer equestrian natures have never learned to fight the battle of life on foot.
The law of absorption has taken their sad, swarthy visages out of the social arena.

The cavalcade of Southerners sweeps over the alamedas. They dash across the Salinas and up
to wooded Monterey. There the first constitutional convention assembles.

Their delighted eyes have rested on the lovely Santa Cruz mountains, the glorious meadows of
Santa Clara, and the great sapphire bay of Monterey. The rich Pajaro and Salinas valleys lie
waiting at hand. Thinking also of the wondrous wealth of the Sacramento and San Joaquin, of
the tropical glories of Los Angeles, Philip Hardin cries: "Gentlemen, this splendid land is
for us! We must rule this new State! We must be true to the South!"

To be in weal and woe "true to the South" is close to the heart of every cavalier in Philip
Hardin's train.

The train arrives at Monterey, swelled by others faithful to that Southern Cross yet to glitter
on dark fields of future battle.

The treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo closed a bloody Conflict on February 2, 1848. It is the preamble
to a long struggle. It is destined in the West to be bloodless until the fatal guns trained
on Fort Sumter bellow out their challenge to the great Civil War. It is only then the mighty
pine will swing with a crash against the palm.

Hardin knows that recruits, true of blood, are hastening to the new land of El Dorado. As he
leads his dauntless followers into Monterey his soul is high. He sees the beloved South sweeping
in victory westward as proudly as her legions rolled over the fields of Monterey and Buena Vista.

The convention assembles. All classes are represented on September 1, 1849. The first legal
civil body is convoked west of the Rockies. Men of thought are here. Men destined to be world-famous
in the unknown future. Settlers, hidalgos, traders, argonauts, government officials of army
and navy, and transient adventurers of no mean ability. A little press already works with its
magical talking types. A navy chaplain is the Franklin of the West. Some order and decorum
appear. The calm voice of prayer is heard. The mingled amens of the conquerors thank God for
a most unjustifiable acquisition of the lands of others. They are ours only by the right of
the strong against the weak--the world's oldest title.

The South leads in representative men. Ready to second the secret desires of Polk, Buchanan,
and Calhoun is the astute and courtly Gwin, yet to be senator, duke of Sonora, and Nestor of
his clan. Moore of Florida, Jones of Louisiana, Botts, Burnett, and others are in line. On
the Northern side are Shannon, an adopted citizen; wise Halleck; polished McDougall; gifted
Edward Gilbert, and other distinguished men--men worthy of the day and hour.

As independent members, Sutter, General Vallejo, Thomas O. Larkin, Dr. Semple, Wright, Hastings,
Brown, McCarver, Rodman S. Price, Snyder, and others lend their aid. From the first day the
advocates of slavery and freedom battle in oratorical storm. The forensic conflict rages for
days; first on the matter of freedom, finally on that of boundary.

Freedom's hosts receive a glorious reinforcement in the arrival of John C. Fremont.

After bitter struggles the convention casts the die for freedom. The Constitution of the State
is so adopted. While the publicists, led by Fremont and Gwin, seek to raise the fabric of state,
the traders and adventurers, the hosts of miners springing to life under the chance touch of
James W. Marshall's finger, on January 24, 1848, are delving or trading for gold.

Poor, ill-starred Marshall! He wanders luckless among the golden fields. He gains no wealth.
He toils as yet, unthinking of his days of old age and lonely poverty. He does not look forward
to being poor at seventy-three years, and dying in 1885 alone. The bronze monument over his
later grave attests no fruition of his hopes. It only can show the warm-hearted gratitude of
children yet unborn, the Native Sons of the Golden West. Cool old borderers like Peter Lassen,
John Bidwell, P. B. Redding, Jacob P. Leese, Wm. B. Ide, Captain Richardson, and others are
grasping broad lands as fair as the banks of Yarrow. They permit the ill-assorted delegates
to lay down rules for the present and laws for the future. The State can take care of itself.
Property-holders appear and aid. Hensley, Henley, Bartlett, and others are cool and able. While
the Dons are solemnly complimented in the convention, their rights are gracefully ignored.

The military governor, General Bennett Riley, stands back. He justly does not throw his sword
into the scales. Around him are rising men yet to be heroes on a grander field of action than
the mud floors of a Monterey adobe. William T. Sherman, the only Northern American strategist,
is a lieutenant of artillery. Halleck, destined to be commander-in-chief of a million men,
is only a captain of engineers and acting Secretary of State. Graceful, unfortunate, accomplished
Charles P. Stone is a staff officer. Ball's Bluff and Fort Lafayette are far in the misty unknown.

The convention adjourns SINE DIE n October 13, 1849. It has settled the great point of freedom
on the Pacific Coast. It throws out the granite Sierras as an eternal bulwark against advancing
slavery. The black shame is doomed never to cross the Rockies, and yet the great struggle for
the born nobility of manhood has been led by Shannon, an alien Irishman. The proudest American
blood followed Dr. Gwin's pro-slavery leading. The two senators named are Gwin and the hitherto
unrewarded Fremont. Wright and Gilbert are the two congressmen. Honest Peter H. Burnett, on
November 13, is elected the first governor of California. He is chosen by the people, and destined
to live to see nearly fifty years of peaceful prosperity on the golden coast.

While this struggle is being waged on the Pacific, at Washington the giant statesmen of those
famous ante-bellum days close in bitter strife. The political future of the great West, now
known to be so rich, is undecided. It is the desperate desire of the South to keep California
out of the Union, unless the part falling under the Wilmot proviso act south of 36 deg 30 min
is given to slavery.

The national funds to pay for the "Gadsden purchase" will be withheld unless slavery can be
extended. The great struggle brings out all the olden heroes of the political arena. Benton,
Webster, Clay, Calhoun, Davis, King, Sam Houston, Foote, Seward, John Bell, and Douglas, are
given a golden prize to tourney for. In that press of good knights, many a hard blow is struck.
The victor and vanquished stand to-day, looming gigantic on the dim horizon of the past. It
is the dark before the dawn of the War of the Rebellion.

It was before these days of degenerated citizenship, when the rising tide of gold floats the
corrupt millionnaire and syndicate's agent into the Senate. The senator's toga then wrapped
the shoulders of our greatest men. No bonanza agents--huge moral deformities of heaped-up gold--were
made senatorial hunchbacks by their accidental millions.

No vulgar clowns dallied with the country's interests in those old days when Greek met Greek.
It was a gigantic duel of six leaders: Webster, Seward, and Clay, pitted against Calhoun, Davis,
and Foote. Pausing to refresh their strength for the final struggle, the noise of battle rolled
away until the early days of 1850. California was kept out.

The delegates at Monterey hastened home to their exciting callings. Philip Hardin saw the wished-for
victory of the South deferred. Gnashing his teeth in rage, he rode out of Monterey. Maxime
Valois now is the ardent "Faust" to whom he plays "Mephisto." His following had fallen away.
Hardin, cold, profound, and deep, was misunderstood at the Convention. He wished to gain local
control. He knew the overmastering power of the pro-slavery administration would handle the
main issue later--if not in peace, then in war.

As the red-tiled roofs of Monterey fade behind them, Hardin unbosoms himself to his young comrade.
Maxime Valois has been a notable leader in the Convention. He was eager and loyal to the South.
He extended many acquaintances with the proud chivalry element of the new State. His short
experience of public life feeds his rising ambition. He determines to follow the law; the glorious
profession which he laid aside to become a pathfinder; the pathway to every civic honor.

"Valois," says Hardin, "these people are too short-sighted. Our Convention leaders are failures.
We should have ignored the slavery fight as yet. Thousands of Southern voters are coming to
us within six months from the border States. Our friends from the Gulf are swarming here. The
President will fill all the Federal offices with sound Southern Democrats. The army and navy
will be in sympathy with us. With a little management we could have got slavery as far as 36
deg 30 sec. We could work it all over the West with the power of our party at the North. We
could have controlled the rest of this coast by the Federal patronage, keeping the free part
out of the Union as territories. Then our balance of power would be stable. It is not a lost
game. Wait! only wait!"

Maxime agrees. Philip Hardin opens the young politician's eyes with a great confidence.

"Maxime, I have learned to like you and depend on you. I will give you a proof of it. We of
the old school are determined to rule this country. If Congress admits California as a free
State, there will yet be a Lone Star republic covering this whole coast. The South will take
it by force when we go out."

The Louisianian exclaims, "Secession!"

"Yes, war even. Rather war than the rule of the Northern mud-sill!" cries Hardin, spurring
his horse, instinctively. "Our leading men at home are in thorough concert day by day. If the
issue is forced on us the whole South will surely go out. But we are not ready yet. Maxime,
we want our share of this great West. We will fill it with at least even numbers of Southern
men. In the next few years the West will be entirely neutral in case of war or unless we get
a fair division. If we re-elect a Democrat as President we will save the whole West."

"War," muses Valois, as they canter down the rich slopes toward the Salinas River, "a war between
the men who have pressed up Cerro Gordo and Chepultepec together! A war between the descendants
of the victorious brothers of the Revolution!" It seems cold and brutal to the young and ardent
Louisianian. An American civil war! The very idea seems unnatural. "But will the Yankees fight?"
queries Valois. Hardin replies grimly: "I did not think we would even be opposed in this Convention.
They seemed to fight us pretty well here. They may fight in the field--when it comes."

For Philip Hardin is a wise man. He never under-estimates his untried enemy.

Valois smiles. He cannot control a sneer. The men who are lumber-hewers, dirt-diggers, cod-fishers
and factory operatives will never face the Southern chivalry. He despises the sneaking Yankees.
Traders in a small way arouse all the arrogance of the planter. He cannot bring any philosophy
of the past to tell him that the straining, leaky Mayflcnver was the pioneer of the stately
American fleets now swarming on every sea. The little wandering Boston bark, Otter, in 1796
found her way to California. She was the harbinger of a mighty future marine control. The lumbering
old Sachem (of the same Yankee borough) in 1822 founded the Pacific hide and tallow trade as
an earnest of the sea control. Where one Yankee shows the way thousands may follow, yet this
Valois ignored in his scorn of the man who works.

Maxime could not dream that the day could ever come when thousands of Yankees would swarm over
entrenchments, vainly held by the best blood of the sunny South.

As the two gentlemen ride on, Hardin uses the confidential loneliness of the trip to prove
to the Creole that war and separation must finally come.

"We want this rich land for ourselves and the South." The young man's blood was up.

"I know the very place I want!" cries Valois.

He tells Hardin of Lagunitas, of its fertile lands sweeping to the San Joaquin. He speaks of
its grassy, rolling hills and virgin woods.

Philip Hardin learns of the dashing waters of the Merced and Mariposa on either side. He hears
of the glittering gem-like Lagunitas sparkling in the bosom of the foot-hills. Valois recounts
the wild legends, caught up from priest and Indian, of that great, terrific gorge, the Yosemite.
Hardin allows much for the young man's wild fancy. The gigantic groves of the big trees are
only vaguely described. Yet he is thrilled.

He has already seen an emigrant who wandered past Mono Lake over the great Mono notch in the
Sierras. There it rises eleven thousand feet above the blue Pacific--with Castle Dome and Cathedral
Peak, grim sentinels towering to the zenith.

"It must really be a paradise," muses Hardin.

"It is," cries the Creole; "I intend to watch that region. If money can make it mine, I will
toil to get it."

Philip Hardin, looking through half-closed eyes at Valois, decides to follow closely this dashing
adventurer. He will go far.

"Valois," he slowly says, "you have seen these native land-barons at the Convention. A few
came in to join us. The rest are hostile and bitter. They can never stand before us. The whole
truth is, the Mexican must go! We stopped the war a little too soon here. They are now protected
by the treaty, but we will litigate them out of all their grants. Keep your eye on Lagunitas.
It may come into the market. Gold will be the fool's beacon here for some time. These great
valleys will yet be the real wealth of the new State. Land is the rock of the wealth to come.
Get land, my boy!" he cries, with the lordly planter's instinct.

Valois admires the cold self-confidence of the sardonic Hardin. He opens his heart. He leans
upon the resolute Mississippian.

It takes little to make Maxime joyfully accept Philip Hardin's invitation to share his office.
They will follow the fortunes of the city by the Golden Gates.

On riding down the Visitacion valley their eyes are greeted with the sight of the first ocean
steamers. A thousand new-comers throng the streets.

Maxime finds a home in the abode of Hardin. His cottage stands on a commanding lot, bought
some time before.

Letters from "Belle Etoile" delight the wanderer. He learns of the well-being of his friends.
Judge Valois' advice to Maxime decides him to cast his lot in with the new State. It is soon
to be called California by legal admission.

Philip Hardin is a leader of the embryo bar of the city. Courts, books, two newspapers and
the elements of a mercantile community are the newest signs of a rapid crystallization toward
order. With magic strides the boundaries of San Francisco enlarge. Every day sees white-winged
sails fluttering. Higher rises the human tumult. From the interior mines, excited reports carry
away half the arrivals. They are eager to scoop up the nuggets, to gather the golden dust.
New signs attract the eye: "Bank," "Hotel," "Merchandise," "Real Estate." Every craft and trade
is represented. It is the vision of a night.

Already a leader, Hardin daily extends his influence as man, politician, and counsellor.

The great game is being played at the nation's capital for the last sanction to the baptism
of the new star in the flag.

California stands knocking at the gates of the Union, with treasure-laden hands. In Congress
the final struggle on admission drags wearily on. Victorious Sam Houston of Texas, seconded
by Jefferson Davis, fresh laurelled from Buena Vista, urges the claims of slavery. Foote "modestly"
demands half of California, with a new slave State cut out from the heart of blood-bought Texas.
But the silver voice of Henry Clay peals out against any extension of slave territory. Proud
King of Alabama appeals in vain to his brethren of the Senate to discipline the two ambitious
freemen of the West, by keeping them out of the Union.

Great men rally to the bugle notes of their mighty leaders.

The gallant son of the South, General Taylor, finds presidential honors following his victories.
In formal message he announces on February 13, 1850, to Congress that the new State waits,
with every detail of first organization, for admission.

Stern Calhoun, chief of the aspiring Southerners, proudly claims a readjustment of the sectional
equality thus menaced. Who shall dare to lift the gauntlet thrown down by South Carolina's
mighty chieftain?

In the hush of a listening Senate, Daniel Webster, the lion of the North, sounds a noble defiance.
"Slavery is excluded from California by the law of nature itself," is his warning admonition.

With solemn brow, and deep-set eyes, flashing with the light of genius, he appeals to the noblest
impulses of the human heart. Breathless senators thrill with his inspired words. "We would
not take pains to reaffirm an ordinance of nature," he cries, and, as his grave argument touches
the listeners, he reverently adds, "nor to re-enact the will of God."

Mighty Seward rises also to throw great New York's gauntlet in the teeth of slavery.

Taunted with its legal constitutional sanction, he exclaims grandly, "There is a higher law
than the Constitution."

Long years have passed since both the colossus of the North and the great Governor entered
into the unbroken silence of the grave. Their immortal words ring still down the columned years
of our country's history. They appeal to noble sons to emulate the heroes of this great conflict.
Shall the slave's chains clank westward? No! Above the din of commoner men, the logic of John
Bell, calm and patriotic, brings conviction. The soaring eloquence of Stephen A. Douglas claims
the Western shores for freedom.

Haughty Foote and steadfast Benton break lances in the arena.

Kentucky's greatest chieftain, whose gallant son's life-blood reddened Buena Vista's field,
marshals the immortal defenders of human liberty. Henry Clay's paternal hand is stretched forth
in blessing over the young Pacific commonwealth. All vainly do the knights of the Southern
Cross rally around mighty Calhoun, as he sits high on slavery's awful throne.

Cold Davis, fiery Foote, ingenious Slidell, polished and versatile Soule, ardent King, fail
to withstand that mighty trio, "Webster, Seward, and Clay," the immortal three. The death of
the soldier-President Taylor calms the clamor for a time. The struggle shifts to the House.
Patriotic Vinton, of Ohio, locks the door on slavery. On the 9th day of September, 1850, President
Millard Fillmore signs the bill which limits the negro hunter to his cotton fields and cane
brakes at home. The representatives of the new State are admitted. A new golden star shines
unpolluted in the national constellation.

Westward the good news flies by steamer. All the shadows on California's future are lifted.

While wearied statesmen rest from the bitter warfare of two long years, from North and South
thousands eagerly rush to the golden land.

The Southern and Border States send hosts of their restless youths.

From the Northwest sturdy freemen, farmers with families, toil toward new homes under freedom's
newest star. The East and Middle States are represented by all their useful classes.

The news of California's admission finds Hardin and Valois already men of mark in the Occidental
city.

Disappointed at the issue, Hardin presses on to personal eminence; he turns his energies to
seeking honors in the legal forum.

Maxime Valois, quietly resuming his studies for the bar, guards his funds, awaiting opportunity
for investment. He burns the midnight oil in deep studies. The two men wander over the growing
avenues of the Babel of the West. Every allurement of luxury, every scheme of vice, all the
arts of painted siren, glib knave, and lurking sharper are here; where the game is, there the
hunter follows. Rapidly arriving steamers pour in hundreds. The camp followers of the Mexican
war have streamed over to San Francisco. The notable arrival of the steamer California brings
crowds of men, heirs to future fame, and good women, the moral salt of the new city. It also
has its New York "Bowery Boys," Philadelphia "Plug Uglies," Baltimore "Roughs," and Albany
"Strikers."

By day, new occupations, strange callings, and the labor of organizing a business community,
engage all men. The ebb and flow of going and returning miners excite the daylight hours. From
long wharves, river steamers, laden to the gunwales, steam past the city shores to Sacramento.
At night, deprived of regular homes, the whole city wanders in the streets, or crowds flashy
places of amusement. Cramped on the hilly peninsula, there are no social lines drawn between
good and bad. Each human being is at sea in a maelstrom of wild license.

The delegated representatives of the Federal Government soon arrive. Power is given largely
to the Southern element. While many of the national officials are distinguished and able, they
soon feel the inspiring madness of unrebuked personal enjoyment.

Money in rough-made octagonal fifty-dollar slugs flows freely. Every counter has its gold-dust
scales. Dust is current by the ounce, half ounce, and quarter ounce. The varied coins of the
whole world pass here freely. The months roll away to see, at the end of 1850, a wider activity;
there is even a greater excitement, a more pronounced madness of dissipation. Speculation,
enterprise, and abandonment of old creeds, scruples, and codes, mark the hour.

The flying year has brought the ablest and most daring moral refugees of the world to these
shores, as well as steady reinforcements of worthy settlers. Pouring over the Sierras, and
dragging across the deserts, the home builders are spreading in the interior. The now regulated
business circles, extending with wonderful elasticity, attract home and foreign pilgrims of
character. Though the Aspasias of Paris, New Orleans, and Australia throng in; though New York
sends its worthless womanhood in floods, there are even now worthy home circles by the Golden
Gate. Church, school, and family begin to build upon solid foundations. All the government
bureaus are in working order. The Custom House is already known as the "Virginia Poor House."
The Post-Office and all Federal places teem with the ardent, haughty, and able ultra Democrats
of the sunny South. The victory of the Convention bids fair to be effaced in the high-handed
control of the State by Southern men. As the rain falleth on the just and unjust, so does the
tide of prosperity enrich both good and bad. Vice, quickly nourished, flaunts its early flowers.
The slower growth of virtue is yet to give golden harvest of gathered sheaves in thousands
of homes yet to be in the Golden State. Long after the maddened wantons and noisy adventurers
have gone the way of all "light flesh and corrupt blood," the homes will stand. Sailing vessels
stream in from the ports of the world. On the narrow water-front, Greek and Lascar, Chinaman
and Maltese, Italian and Swede, Russian and Spaniard, Chileno and Portuguese jostle the men
of the East, South, and the old country. Fiery French, steady German, and hot-headed Irish
are all here, members of the new empire by the golden baptism of the time.

Knife and revolver, billy and slung-shot, dirk and poniard, decide the ARGUMENTUM AD HOMINEM.

In the enjoyment of fraternal relations with the leaders of the dominant party East, Philip
Hardin becomes a trusted counsellor of the leading officials. He sees the forum of justice
opened in the name of Union and State. He ministers at the altars of the Law. He gains, daily,
renown and riches in his able conduct of affairs.

Hardin's revenue rises. He despises one of the State judgeships easily at his hand. As his
star mounts, his young neophyte, Maxime Valois, shares his toils and enjoys his training. Under
his guidance he launches out on the sea of that professional legal activity, which is one continued
storm of contention.

Valois has trusted none of the mushroom banks. He keeps his gold with the Padres. He makes
a number of judicious purchases of blocks and lots in the city, now growing into stable brick,
stone, and even iron.

CHAPTER VII.

THE QUEEN OF THE EL DORADO.--GUILTY BONDS.

In the dreary winter of 1850-51, there are luxurious resting places for the crowds driven at
night from the narrow plank sidewalks of the Bay City. Rain torrents make the great saloons
and gambling houses the only available shelter.

Running east and west, Sacramento, Clay, Washington, and Jackson Streets rise in almost impracticable
declivity to the hills. Their tops, now inaccessible, are to be the future eyries of self-crowned
railroad nobs and rude bonanza barons.

Scrubby chaparral, tenanted by the coyote, fox, and sand rabbit, covers these fringing sand
hills. North and south, Sansome, Montgomery, Kearney, Dupont, Stockton, and a faint outline
of Powell Street, are roadways more or less inchoate. An embryo western Paris.

Around the plaza, bounded by Clay, Washington, Dupont, and Kearney, the revelry of night crystallizes.
It is the aggregating sympathy of birds of a feather.

The peculiar unconquered topography makes the handcart, wheelbarrow, and even the Chinaman's
carrying poles, necessary vehicles of transit.

Water, brought in iron boats from Sansalito, is dragged around these knobby hills in huge casks
on wheels. The precious fluid is distributed in five-gallon tin buckets, borne on a yoke by
the dealer, who gets a dollar for two bucketfuls. No one finds time to dig for water. All have
leisure to drink, dance, and gamble. They face every disease, danger, and hardship. They breast
the grizzly-bear-haunted canyons in search of gold. No one will seek for water. It is the only
luxury. The incoming and outgoing merchandise moves only a few rods from the narrow level city
front. At the long wharves it is transshipped from the deep-water vessels, across forty feet
of crazy wooden pier, to the river steamers. Lighters in the stream transfer goods to the smaller
vessels beginning to trade up and down the coast.

In the plaza, now dignified by the RAFFINE name of "Portsmouth Square," the red banners of
vice wave triumphant over great citadels of sin. Virtue is pushed to the distant heights and
knolls. The arriving families, for sheer self-protection, avoid this devil's maelstrom. It
sucks the wide crowd into the maddened nightly orgies of the plaza.

In the most pretentious buildings of the town, the great trinity of unlawful pleasures holds
high carnival. Day and night are the same: drink, gaming, and women are worshipped. For the
average resident there is no barrier of old which has not been burned away in the fever of
personal freedom and the flood of gold.

A motley mass of twenty thousand men and women daily augments. They are all of full capacity
for good and evil. They are bound by no common ties. They serve no god but pleasure. They fear
no code. With no intention to remain longer than the profit of their adventures or the pleasures
of their wild life last, they catch the passing moment.

Immense saloons are made attractive by displays of gaudy luxuries, set out to tempt the purses
of the self-made autocrats of wealth. Gambling houses here are outvying in richness, and utter
wantonness of wasted expense, anything yet seen in America. They are open always. Haunts abound
where, in the pretended seclusion of a few yards' distance, rich adventurers riot with the
beautiful battalions of the fallen angels. It were gross profanation to the baleful memories
of Phryne, Aspasia, and Messalina to find, from all the sin-stained leaves of the world's past,
prototypes of these bold, reckless man-eaters. They throng the softly carpeted, richly tapestried
interiors of the gilded hells of Venus.

Drink and play. Twins steeds of the devil's car on the road to ruin. They are lashed on by
wild-eyed, bright, beautiful demons. All follow the train of the modern reigning star of the
West, Venus.

Shabby dance-halls, ephemeral Thespian efforts, cheap dens of the most brutal vice, and dark
lairs abound, where sailors, laborers, and crowding criminals lurk, ready for their human prey.
Their female accomplices are only the sirens watching these great strongholds of brazen vice.
A greater luxury only gilds a lower form of human abasement. The motley horde, wallowing on
the "Barbary Coast" and in the mongrel thieves' haunts of "Pacific Street," the entrenched
human devils on "Telegraph Hill" are but natural prey of the coarsest vices.

The ready revolver, Colt's devilish invention, has deluged the West and South with blood. Murder's
prime minister hangs in every man's belt. Colonel James Bowie's awful knife is a twin of this
monstrous birth. In long years of dark national shame our country will curse the memory of
the "two Colonels." They were typical of their different sectional ideas. These men gave us
the present coat of arms of San Francisco: the Colt's revolver and the Bowie knife.

Yes, thousands of yet untenanted graves yawn for the future victims of these mechanical devices.
The skill of the Northern inventor, and the devilish perfection of the heart-cleaving blade
of the Southern duellist are a shame to this wild age.

The plaza with impartial liberality yields up its frontages to saloon, palace of play, and
hotels for the fair ministers of His Satanic Majesty. It is the pride of the enterprising "sports"
and "sharpers," who represent the baccalaureate degree of every known vice. On the west, the
"Adelphi" towers, with its grand gambling saloon, its splendid "salle a manger," and cosey
nooks presided over by attractive Frenchwomen. Long tables, under crystal chandeliers, offer
a choice of roads to ruin. Monte, faro, rouge et noir, roulette, rondo and every gambling device
are here, to lure the unwary. Dark-eyed subtle attendants lurk, ready to "preserve order,"
in gambling parlance. At night, blazing with lights, the superb erotic pictures on the walls
look down on a mad crowd of desperate gamesters. Paris has sent its most suggestive pictures
here, to inflame the wildest of human passions. Nymph and satyr gleam from glittering walls;
Venus approves with melting glances, from costliest frames, the self-immolation of these dupes
of fortune. Every wanton grace of the artist throws a luxurious refinement of the ideal over
the palace of sin and shame.

Long counters, with splendid mirrors, display richest plate. They groan with costliest glass,
and every dark beverage from hell's hottest brew. Card tables, and quiet recesses, richly curtained,
invite to self-surrender and seclusion. The softest music breathes from a full orchestra. Gold
is everywhere, in slugs, doubloons, and heaps of nuggets. Gold reigns here. Silver is a meaner
metal hardly attainable. Bank notes are a flimsy possibility of the future. Piles of yellow
sovereigns and the coinage of every land load the tables. Sallow, glittering-eyed croupiers
sweep in, with affected nonchalance, this easy-gained harvest of chance or fraud.

As the evening wears on, these halls fill up with young and old. The bright face of youth is
seen, inflamed with every burning passion, let loose in the wild uncontrolled West. It is side
by side with the haggard visage of the veteran gamester. Every race has its representatives.
The possession of gold is the cachet of good-fellowship. Anxious crowds criticise rapid and
dashing play. The rattle of dice, calls of the dealers, shouts of the attendants ring out.
The sharp, hard, ringing voices of the fallen goddesses of the tables rise on the stifling
air, reeking of smoke and wine. Dressed with the spoils of the East, bare of bosom, bright
of eye, hard of heart, glittering in flashing gems, and nerved with drink, are these women.
The painted sirens of the Adelphi smile, with curled carmine lips which give the lie to the
bold glances of the wary eyes of those she-devils.

With a hideous past thrown far behind them, they fear no future. Desperate as to the present,
ministering to sin, inciting to violence, conspiring to destroy body and soul, these beautiful
annihilators of all decency vie in deviltry only with each other.

They flaunt, by day, toilettes like duchesses' over the muddy streets; their midnight revels
outlast the stars sweeping to the pure bosom of the Pacific. The nightly net is drawn till
no casting brings new gudgeons. An unparalleled display of wildest license and maddest abandonment
marks day and night.

Across the square the Bella Union boasts similar glories, equal grandeur, and its own local
divinities of the Lampsacene goddess.

It is but a stone's throw to the great Arcade. From Clay to Commercial Street, one grand room
offers every allurement to hundreds, without any sign of overcrowding. The devil is not in
narrow quarters.

On the eastern front of the plaza, the pride of San Francisco towers up: the El Dorado. Here
every glory of the Adelphi, Arcade, and Bella Union is eclipsed. The unrivalled splendor of
rooms, rich decorations, and unexcelled beauty of pictures excite all. The rare liveliness
of the attendant wantons marks them as the fairest daughters of Beelzebub. The world waves
have stranded these children of Venus on the Pacific shores. Music, recalling the genius of
the inspired masters, sways the varying emotions of the multitude. The miners' evenings are
given up to roaming from one resort to another. Here, a certain varnish of necessary politeness
restrains the throng of men; they are all armed and in the flush of physical power; they dash
their thousands against impregnable and exciting gambling combinations at the tables. With
no feeling of self-abasement, leading officials, merchants, bankers, judges, officers, and
professional men crowd the royal El Dorado. Here they relax the labors of the day with every
distraction known to human dissipation.

Staggering out broken-hearted, in the dark midnight, dozens of ruined gamesters have wandered
from these fatal doors into the plaza. The nearest alley gives a shelter; a pistol ball crashes
into the half-crazed brain.

Suicide!--the gambler's end! Already the Potter's Field claims many of these victims. The successful
murderers and thugs linger in the dark shadows of Dupont Street. They crowd Murderer's Alley,
Dunbar's Alley, and Kearney Street.

When the purse is emptied, so that the calculating women dealers scorn to notice the last few
coins, they point significantly to the outer darkness. "Vamos," is the word. A few rods will
bring the plucked fool to the "Blue Wing," the "Magnolia," or any one of a hundred drinking
dens. Here the bottle chases away all memories of the night's play.

In utter defiance of the decent community, these temples of pleasure, with their quick-witted
knaves, and garrisons of bright-eyed bacchanals, ignore the useful day; at night, they shine
out, splendid lighthouses on the path to the dark entrance of hell. By mutual avoidance, the
good and bad, the bright and dark side of human effort rule in alternation the day and night.
Sin rests in the daytime.

In the barracks, where the serried battalions of crime loll away the garish day, silence discreetly
rules. Sleep and rest mark the sunlit hours. The late afternoon parade is an excitant.

All over San Francisco, in its queerly assorted tenancy, church and saloon, school and opium
den, thieves' resort and budding home, are placed side by side. Vigorous elbowing of the criminal
and base classes finally forces all that is decent into a semi-banishment. Decency is driven
to the distant hills, crowned with their scrubby oaks. Vice needs the city centre. It always does.

Philip Hardin is cynical and without family ties. Able by nature, skilled in books, and a master
of human strategy he needs some broader field for the sweep of his splendid talents than the
narrowed forum of the local courts. Ambition offers no immediate prize to struggle for. The
busy present calls on him for daily professional effort. Political events point to an exciting
struggle between North and South in the future; but the hour of fate is not yet on the dial.

In the Southerner's dislike of the contact of others, looking to his place as a social leader
of the political element, Philip Hardin lives alone; his temporary cottage is planted in a
large lot removed from the immediate danger of fires. His quick wit tells him they will some
day sweep the crowded houses in the eastern part of the city, as far as the bay. The larger
native oaks still afford a genial shade. Their shadows give the tired lawyer a few square rods
of breathing space. Books and all the implements of the scholar are his; the interior is crowded
with those luxuries which Hardin enjoys as of right. Deeply drinking the cup of life, even
in his social vices, Philip Hardin aims at a certain distinction.

Around his table gather the choicest knights-errant of the golden quest. Maxime Valois here
develops a social talent as a leader of men, guided by the sardonic Mephisto of his young life.

Still the evening hours hang heavily on the hands of the two lawyers. When the rapidly arriving
steamers bring friends, with letters or introductions, they have hospitality to dispense. The
great leaders of the South are now systematically colonizing California. Guests abound at these
times at Hardin's board. Travel, mining, exploration, and adventure carry them away soon; extensive
tours on official duty draw them away. As occupations increase, men grow unmindful of each
other and meet more rarely.

For the saloons, rude hotels, gaming palaces, and resorts of covert pleasures are the usual
rendezvous of the men of fortune and power. In such resorts grave intrigues are planned; future
policies are mapped out; business goes on under the laughter of wild-eyed Maenads; secrets
of state are whispered between glass and glass.

Family circles, cooped up, timid and distant, keep their doors closed to the general public.
No one has yet dared to permanently set up here their Lares and Penates. The subordination
of family life to externals, and insincerity of social compacts, are destined to make California
a mere abiding place for several generations. The fibres of ancestry must first knit the living
into close communion with their parents born on these Western shores. Hardin's domineering
nature, craving excitement and control over others, carries him often to the great halls of
play; cigar in mouth, he stands unmoved; he watches the chances of play. Nerved with the cognac
he loves, he moves quickly to the table; he astonishes all by the deliberate daring of his
play. His iron nerve is unshaken by the allurements of the painted dancers and surrounding
villains. Towering high above all others, the gifted Mississippian nightly refreshes his jaded
emotions. He revels in the varying fortunes of the many games he coolly enjoys. Unheeding others,
moving neither right nor left at menace or danger, Hardin scorns this human circus, struggling
far below his own mental height.

Heartless and unmoved, he smiles at the weaknesses of others. The strong man led captive in
Beauty's train, the bright intellect sinking under the craze of drink, the weak nature shattered
by the loss of a few thousands at play--all this pleases him. He sees, with prophetic eye,
hundreds of thousands of future dwellers between the Sierras and the sea. His Southern pride
looks forward to a control of the great West by the haughty slave-owners.

This Northern trash must disappear! To ride on the top wave of the future successful community,
is his settled determination. Without self-surrender, he enjoys every draught of pleasure the
cup of life can offer. Without scruple, void of enthusiasm, his passionless heart is unmoved
by the joys or sorrows of others. His nature is as steady as the nerve with which he guides
his evening pistol practice. The welcome given to Maxime Valois by him arises only from a conviction
of that man's future usefulness. The general acceptability of the young Louisianian is undoubted.
His blood, creed, and manners prove him worthy of the old Valois family. Their past glories
are well known to Philip Hardin. "Bon sang ne peut mentir." Hardin's legal position places
him high in the turmoils of the litigations of the great Mexican grants. Already, over the
Sonoma, Napa, Santa Clara, San Joaquin and Sacramento valleys all is in jeopardy. The old Dons
begin to seek confirmations of the legal lines, to keep the crowding settlers at bay. The mining,
trading, and land-grabbing of the Americans are pushed to the limits of the new commonwealth.
A backward movement of the poor Mexican natives carries them between the Americans and the
yet powerful land barons of their own race. Harassed, unfit to work, unable to cope with the
intruders, the native Californians become homeless rovers. They are bitter at heart. Many,
in open resentment, rise on the plains or haunt the lonely trails. They are now bandits, horse-thieves,
footpads and murderers. True to each other, they establish a chain of secret refuges from Shasta
to San Diego. Every marauder of their own blood is safe among them from American pursuers.

Every mining camp and all the settlements are beginning to send refugees of the male foreign
criminal classes to join these wandering Mexican bands.

With riot in the camps, licentiousness ruling the cities, and murder besetting every path,
there is no safety for the present. California sees no guarantee for the future. Judge Lynch
is the only recognized authority. He represents the rough justice of outraged camps and infuriated
citizens. Unrepressed violent crimes lead to the retaliatory butchery of vigilance committees.
Innocent and guilty suffer without warrant of law. Foreign criminal clans herd together in
San Francisco for mutual aid. The different Atlantic cities are separately represented in knots
of powerful villains. Politics, gambling, and the elements of wealth flourishing in dens and
resorts, are controlled by organized villains. They band together against the good. Only some
personal brawl throws them against each other.

Looking at the dangerous mass of vicious men and women, Valois determines that the real strength
of the land will lie in the arrivals by the overland caravans. These trains are now filling
the valleys with resolute and honest settlers.

His determination holds yet to acquire some large tract of land where he may have a future
domain. On professional visits to Sacramento, Stockton, and San Jose he notes the rising of
the agricultural power in the interior. In thought he yearns often for the beauties of splendid
Lagunitas. Padre Ribaut writes him of the sullen retirement of Don Miguel. He grows more morose
daily. Valois learns of the failing of the sorrow-subdued Donna Juanita. The girlish beauty
of young Dolores is pictured in these letters. She approaches the early development of her
rare beauty. Padre Francisco has his daily occupation in his church and school. The higher
education of pretty Dolores is his only luxury. Were it not for this, he would abandon the
barren spiritual field and return to France. Already in the canyons of the Mariposa, Fresno,
and in the great foot-hills, miners are scratching around the river beds. Hostile settlers
are approaching from the valley the Don's boundaries. These signs are ominous.

Padre Francisco writes that as yet Don Miguel is sullenly ferocious. He absolutely refuses
any submission of his grant titles to the cursed Gringos. Padre Francisco has not been able
to convince the ex-commandante of the power of the great United States. He knows not it can
cancel or reject his title to the thousands of rich acres where his cattle graze and his horses
sweep in mustang wildness. Even from his very boundaries the plough can now be seen breaking
up the breast of the virgin valley. The Don will take no heed. He is blinded by prejudice.
Maxime promises the good priest to visit him. He wonders if the savage Don would decline a
word. If the frightened, faded wife would deign to speak to the Americano. If the budding beauty
would now cast roses slyly at him from the bowers of her childhood.

Maxime's heart is young and warm. He is chilled in his affections. The loss of his parents
made his life lonely. Judge Valois, his uncle, has but one child, a boy born since Maxime's
departure on the Western adventure. Between Hardin and himself is a bar of twenty years of
cool experience. It indurates and blunts any gracefulness Hardin's youth ever possessed. If
any man of forty has gained knowledge of good and evil, it is the accomplished Hardin. He is
a law unto himself.

Fearing neither God nor man, insensible to tenderness, Philip Hardin looks in vain to refresh
his jaded emotions by the every-day diversions of the city by the sea. The daily brawls, the
excited vigilance committee of the first winter session of popular justice, and partial burning
of the city, leave Hardin unmoved. It is a dismal March night of 1851 when he leaves his residence
for a stroll through the resorts of the town. Valois listlessly accompanies him. He does not
gamble. To the El Dorado the two slowly saunter. The nightly battle over the heaps of gold
is at its height. At the superb marble counter they are served with the choicest beverages
and regalias of Vuelta Abajos' best leaf. The human mob is dense. Wailing, passionate music
beats upon the air. There is the cry of lost souls in its under-toned pathos. Villany and sentiment
go hand in hand at the El Dorado. The songs of old, in voice and symphony, unlock the gates
of memory. They leave the lingerers, disarmed, to the tempting allurements of beauty, drink,
and gaming.

There is an unusual crowd in the headquarters of gilded folly. Maxime, wandering alone for
a few minutes, finds a throng around a table of rouge et noir. It is crowded with eager gamesters.
Nodding to one and another, he meets many acquaintances--men have no real friends as yet in
this egoistic land. The Louisianian moves toward the goal whither all are tending. Jealous
glances are cast by women whose deserted tables show their charms are too well known. All swarm
toward a new centre of attraction. Cheeks long unused to the blush of shame are reddened with
passion, to see the fickle crowd surge around the game presided over by a new-comer to the
sandy shores of San Francisco. She is an unknown goddess.

"What's all this?" asks Maxime, of a man he knows. He is idling now, with an amused smile.
He catches a glimpse of the tall form of Philip Hardin in the front row of players, near the
yellow bulwarks of gold.

"Why, Valois, you are behind the times!" is the reply. "Don't you know the 'Queen of the El
Dorado'?"

"I confess I do not," says the Creole. He has been absent for some time from this resort of
men with more gold than brains. "Who is she? What is she?" continues Maxime.

His friend laughs as he gaily replies, "As to what she is, walk up to the table. Throw away
an ounce, and look at her. It's worth it. As to who she is, she calls herself Hortense Duval."
"I suppose she has as much right to call herself the daughter of the moon as to use that aristocratic
name." "My dear boy, she is, for all that--" "Queen Hortense?" "Queen of the El Dorado." He
saunters away, to allow Valois a chance to edge his way into the front row. There the dropping
gold is raked in by this fresh siren who draws all men to her.

Dressed in robes of price, a young woman sits twirling the arrow of destiny at the treasure-laden
table. Her exquisite form is audaciously and recklessly exposed by a daring costume. Her superb
arms are bared to the shoulder, save where heavy-gemmed bracelets clasp glittering badges of
sin around her slender wrists. An indescribable grace and charm is in every movement of her
sinuous body. Her well-poised head is set upon a neck of ivory. The lustrous dark eyes rove
around the circle of eager betters with languishing velvety glances. A smile, half a sneer,
lingers on the curved lips. Her statuesque beauty of feature is enhanced by the rippling dark
masses of hair crowning her lovely brows. In the silky waves of her coronal, shines one diamond
star of surpassing richness. In all the pride and freshness of youth her loveliness is unmarred
by the tawdry arts of cosmetic and make-up. Unabashed by the admiration she compels, she calmly
pursues her exciting calling. The new-comer is well worthy the rank, by general acclaim, of
"Queen of the El Dorado." In no way does she notice the eager crowd. She is an impartial priestess
of fortune. Maxime waits only to hear her speak. She is silent, save the monosyllabic French
words of the game. Is she Cuban, Creole, French, Andalusian, Italian, or a wandering gypsy
star? A jewelled dagger-sheath in her corsage speaks of Spain or Italy. Maxime notes the unaccustomed
eagerness with which Hardin recklessly plays. He seems determined to attract the especial attention
of the divinity of the hour. Hardin's color is unusual. His features are sternly set. Near
him stands "French Charlie," one of the deadliest gamesters of the plaza. Equally quick with
card, knife, or trigger, the Creole gambler is a man to be avoided. He is as dangerous as the
crouching panther in its fearful leap.

Hardin, betting on black, seems to win steadily. "French Charlie" sets his store of ready gold
on the red. It is a reckless duel of the two men through the medium of the golden arrow, twirled
by the voluptuous stranger.

A sudden idea strikes Valois. He notes the ominous sparkle of "French Charlie's" eye. It is
cold as the depths of a mountain-pool. Is Hardin betting on the black to compliment the presiding
dark beauty? Murmurs arise among the bystanders. The play grows higher. Valois moves away from
the surging crowd, to wait his own opportunity. A glass of wine with a friend enables him to
learn her history. She has been pursued by "French Charlie" since her arrival from Panama by
steamer. No one knows if the reigning beauty is Havanese or a French Creole. Several aver she
speaks French and Spanish with equal ease. English receives a dainty foreign accent from the
rosebud lips. Her mysterious identity is guarded by the delighted proprietors. The riches of
their deep-jawed safes tell of her wonderful luck, address, or skill.

Charlie has in vain tried to cross the invisible barrier which fences her from the men around
her. To-night he is as unlucky in his heavy play, as in arousing any passion in that wonderful
beauty of unexplained identity. The management will answer no questions. This nightly excitement
feeds on itself. "French Charlie" has been drinking deeply. His play grows more unlucky. Valois
moves to the table, to quietly induce Hardin to leave. Some inner foreboding tells Valois there
is danger in the gambling duel of the two men he watches. As he forces his way in, Charlie,
dashing a last handful of gold upon the red, turns his ferocious eyes on Hardin. The lawyer
calmly waits the turn of the arrow. Some quick presentiment reaches the mind of the woman.
Her nerves are shaken with the strain of long repression. The arrow trembles on the line in
stopping. The queen's eyes, for the first time, catch the burning glances of Philip Hardin.
"French Charlie," with an oath, grasps the hand of the woman. She is raking in his lost coins
before paying Hardin's bet. It is his last handful of gold.

Maddened with drink and his losses, Charlie yields to jealousy of his victorious neighbor.
"French Charlie" roughly twists the wrist of the woman. With a sharp shriek, she snatches the
dagger from her bosom. She draws it over the back of the gambler's hand. He howls with pain.
Like a flash he tears a knife from his bosom. He springs around the table toward the woman.
With a loud scream, she jumps back toward the wall. She seeks to save herself, casting golden
showers on the floor, in a rattling avalanche. Before the ready hireling desperadoes of the
haunt can seize Charlie, the affrighted circle scatters. Valois' eye catches, the flash of
a silver-mounted derringer. Its barking report rings out as "French Charlie's" right arm drops
to his side. His bowie-knife falls ringing on the floor. A despairing curse is heard. The Creole
gambler snatches, with the other hand, a pistol. He springs like a lion on Philip Hardin. One
step back Hardin retreats. No word comes from his closed lips. The mate of the derringer rings
out loudly Charlie's death warrant. The gambler crashes to the floor. His heart's blood floods
the scattered gold. The pistol is yet clenched in his stiffened left hand. Valois rushes to
Hardin. He brushes him aside, and springs to the side of the "Queen of the El Dorado." She
falls senseless in his arms. In a few moments the motley crowd has been hurried from the doors.
The great entrances are barred. The frightened women dealers seek their dressing-rooms. All
fear the results of this brawl. Their cheeks are ashy pale under paint and powder. The treasures
are swiftly swept from the gaming tables by the nimble-witted croupiers. Hardin and Valois
are left with the unconscious fallen beauty. A couple of the lately organized city police enter
and take charge. Even the blood stained gold is gathered from the floor. Light after light
is turned out. The main hall has at last no tenants but the night watchman and the police,
waiting by the dead gambler. He lies prone on the floor, awaiting his last judge, the city
coroner. This genial official is sought from his cards and cups, to certify the causes of death
of the outcast of society. A self-demonstrating problem. The gaping wound tells its story.

Valois is speechless and stunned with the quickness of the deadly quarrel. He gloomily watches
Hardin supporting the fainting woman. Slowly her eyes unclose. They meet Hardin's in one long,
steadfast, inscrutable glance. She shudders and says, "Take me away." She covers her siren
face with her jewelled hands, to avoid the sight of the waxy features and stiffening form of
the thing lying there. Ten minutes ago it was the embodiment of wildest human passion and tiger-like
activity. Vale, "French Charlie."

Hardin has quickly sent for several influential friends. On their arrival he is permitted to
leave, escorted by a policeman. The shaken sorceress, whose fatal beauty has thrown two determined
men against each other in a sudden duel to the death, walks at his side. There is a bond of
blood sealed between them. It is the mere sensation of a night; the talk of an idle day. On
the next evening the "El Dorado" is thronged with a great multitude. It is eager to gaze on
the wondrous woman's face, for which "French Charlie" died. Their quest is vain. Another daughter
of the Paphian divinity presides at the shrine of rouge et noir. The blood-stains are effaced
from the floor. A fresh red mound in the city cemetery is the only relic of French Charlie.
Philip Hardin, released upon heavy bail, awaits a farcical investigation. After a few days
he bears no legal burden of this crime. Only the easy load upon his conscience. Although the
mark of Cain sets up a barrier between him and his fellows, and the murder calls for the vengeance
of God, Philip Hardin goes his way with unclouded brow. His eyes have a strange new light in them.

The "Queen of the El Dorado" sits no more at the wheel of fortune. Day succeeds to day. Nightly
expectation is balked. Her absent charms are magnified in description. The memory of the graceful,
dazzling Hortense Duval fades from the men who struggle around the gaming boards of the great
"El Dorado." She never shows her charming face again in the hall.

The secret of the disappearance of this mysterious sovereign of chance is known to but few.
It is merely surmised by others. To Maxime Valois the bloody occurrence has borne fruits of
importance. As soon as some business is arranged, the shadowy barrier of this tragedy divides
the two men. Though slight, it is yet such that Valois decides to go to Stockton. The San Joaquin
valley offers him a field. Land matters give ample scope to his talents. The investment in
lands can be better arranged from there. The Creole is glad to cast his lot in the new community.
By sympathy, many Southerners crowd in. They gain control of the beautiful prairies from which
the herds of elk and antelope are disappearing.

Philip Hardin's safety is assured. With no open breach of friendship between them, Maxime still
feels estranged. He visits the scene of his future residence. His belongings follow him. It
was an intuition following a tacit understanding. Man instinctively shuns the murderer.

Maxime never asked of the future of the vanished queen of the El Dorado. In his visits to San
Francisco he finds that few cross Philip Hardin's threshold socially. Even these are never
bid to come again. Is there a hidden queen in the house on the hill? Rumor says so.

Rising in power, Philip Hardin steadily moves forward. He asks no favors. He seeks no friends.
All unmindful is he of the tattle that a veiled lady of elegant appearance sometimes walks
under the leafy bowers shading his lovely home.

The excitable populace find new food for gossip. There are more residences than one in San
Francisco, where dreamy luxury is hidden within the unromantic wooden boxes called residences.

Fair faces gleam out furtively from these casements. At open doors, across whose thresholds
no woman of position ever sets a foot, wealth stands on guard. Silence seals the portals. The
vassals of gold wait in velvet slippers. The laws of possession are enforced by the dangers
of any trespass on these Western harems.

While the queen city of the West rises rapidly it is only a modern Babylon on the hills of
the bay. The influx augments all classes. Every element of present and future usefulness slowly
makes headway against the current of mere adventure. Natural obstacles yield to patient, honest
industry. California begins in grains, fruits, and all the rich returns of nature, to show
that Ceres, Flora, and Pomona are a trinity of witching good fairies. They beckon to the world
to wander hither, and rest under these blue-vaulted balmy skies. Near the splendid streams,
picturesque ridges, and lovely valleys of the new State, health and happiness may be found,
even peace.

The State capital is located, drawn by the golden magnet, at Sacramento. The only conquest
left for the dominating Americans, is the development of this rich landed domain. Here, where
the Padres dreamed over their monkish breviaries, where the nomad native Californians lived
only on the carcasses of their wild herds, the richest plains on earth invite the honest hand
of the farmer.

The era of frantic dissipation, wildest license, insane speculation, and temporary abiding
wears away. Bower and blossom, bird and bee, begin to adorn the new homes of the Pacific.

Mighty-hearted men, keen of vision, strong of purpose, appear. The face of nature is made to
change under the resolute attacks of inventive man. Roads and bridges, wharves and storehouses,
telegraph lines, steamer routes, express and stage systems, banks and post-offices, courts,
churches, marts and halls, all come as if at magic call. The school-master is abroad. Public
offices and records are in working order. Though the fierce hill Indians now and then attack
the miners, they are driven back toward the great citadel of the Sacramento River. The huge
mountain ranges on the Oregon border are their last fastnesses.

In every community of the growing State, the law is aided by quickly executed decrees of vigilance
committees. Self-appointed popular leaders, crafty politicians, scheming preachers, aspiring
editors, and ambitious demagogues crop up. They are the mushroom growth of the muck-heap of
the new civilization.

Hardin gathers up with friendships the rising men of all the counties. At the newly formed
clubs of the city his regular entertainments are a nucleus of a socio-political organization
to advance the ambitious lawyer and the cause of the South.

Men say he looks to the Senate, or the Supreme Bench. Maxime Valois, rising in power at Stockton,
retains the warmest confidence of Hardin. He knows the crafty advocate is the arch-priest of
Secession. Month by month, he is knitting up the web of his dark intrigues. He would unite
the daring sons of the South in one great secret organization, ready to strike when the hour
of destiny is at hand. It comes nearer, day by day. Here, in this secret cause of the South,
Valois' heart and soul go out to Hardin. He feels the South was juggled out of California.
Both he and his Mephisto are gazing greedily on the wonderful development of the coast. Even
adjoining Arizona and New Mexico begin to fill up. The conspirators know the South is handicapped
in the irrepressible conflict unless some diversion is made in the West. They must secure for
the states of the Southern Republic their aliquot share of the varied treasures of the West.
The rich spoil of an unholy war.

Far-seeing and wise is the pupil of Calhoun and Slidell. He is the coadjutor of the subtle
Gwin. Hardin feeds the flame of Maxime Valois' ardor. The business friendship of the men continues
unabated. They need each other. With rare delicacy, Valois never refers to the blood-bought
"beauty of the El Dorado." Her graceful form never throws its shadow over the threshold of
the luxurious home of the lawyer. On rare visits to the residence of his friend, Valois' quick
eye notes the evidence of a reigning divinity. A piano and a guitar, a scarf here, a few womanly
treasures there, are indications of a "manage a deux." They prove to Maxime that the Egeria
of this intellectual king lingers near her victim. He is still under her mystic spell. Breasting
the tide of litigation in the United States and State courts, popular and ardent, the Louisianian
thrives. He rises into independent manhood. He is toasted in Sacramento, where in legislative
halls his fiery eloquence distinguishes him. He is the king of the San Joaquin valley.

Preserving his friendship with the clergy, still warmly allied to Padre Francisco, Maxime Valois
gradually gains an unquestioned leadership. His friends at New Orleans are proud of this young
pilgrim from "Belle Etoile." Judge Valois hopes that the coming man will return to Louisiana
in search of some bright daughter of that sunny land, a goddess to share the honors of the
younger branch of the old Valois family. Rosy dreams!

Maxima, satisfied, yet not happy, sees a great commonwealth grow up around him. Looking under
the tides of the political struggles, he can feel the undertow of the future. It seems to drag
him back to the old Southern land of his birth, "Home to Dixie."

CHAPTER VIII.

JOAQUIN, THE MOUNTAIN ROBBER.--THE DON'S PERIL.

The leaders of the San Joaquin meet at the office of Counsellor Maxime Valois. He is the rising
political chief. While multitudes yet delve for gold, Valois wisely heads those who see that
the miners are merely nomadic. They are all adventurers. The great men of the coast will be
those who control its broad lands, and create ways of communication. The men who develop manufactures,
start commercial enterprises, and the farmers, will develop resources of this virgin State.
The thousand vocations of civilization are building up a solid fabric for future generations.

True, the poet, the story-writer, and the careless stranger will be fascinated by the heroes
of camp and glen. High-booted, red-shirted, revolver-carrying, bearded argonauts are they,
braving all hardships, enjoying sudden wealth, and leading romantic lives. Stories of camp
and cabin, with brief Monte-Cristo appearances at San Francisco, are the popular rage. These
rough heroes are led captive, even as Samson was betrayed by Delilah. The discovery of quartz
mining leads Valois to believe that an American science of geologic mining will be a great
help in the future. Years of failure and effort, great experience, with associated capital,
will be needed for exploring the deep quartz veins. Their mysterious origin baffles the scientist.

Long after the individual argonauts have laid their weary brows upon the drifted pine needles
in the deep eternal sleep of Death, the problem will be solved. When their lonely graves are
landmarks of the Sierras; when the ephemeral tent towns have been folded up forever, the broad
lands of California will support great communities. To them, these early days will be as unreal
as the misty wreaths clinging around the Sierras.

The romance of the Gilded Age! Each decade throws a deeper mantle of the shadowy past over
the struggles of fresh hearts that failed in the mad race for gold.

Their lives become, day by day, a mere disjointed mass of paltry incident. Their careers point
no moral, even if they adorn the future tale. The type of the argonaut itself begins to disappear.
Those who returned freighted with gold to their foreign homes are rich, and leading other lives
far away. Those who diverted their new-found wealth into industries are prospering. They will
leave histories and stable monuments of their life-work. But the great band of placer hunters
have wandered into the distant territories of the great West. They leave their bones scattered,
under the Indian's attack, or die on distant quests. They drop into the stream of unknown fate.
No moral purpose attended their arrival. No high aim directed their labors. As silently as
they came, the rope of sand has sifted away. Their influence is absolutely nothing upon the
future social life of California. Even later Californian society owes nothing of its feverish
strangeness to these gold hunters. They toiled in their historic quest. The prosaic results
of the polyglot settlement of the new State are not of their direction.

The bizarre Western character is due to an admixture of ill-assorted elements. Not to gold
itself or the lust of gold. The personal history of the gold hunters is almost valueless. No
hallowed memory clings to the miner's grave. No blessing such as hovers over the soldier, dead
under his country's banner.

The early miners fell by the way, while grubbing for gold. Their ends were only selfish gain.
Their gold was a minister of vilest pleasures. A fool's title to temporary importance.

Among them were many of high powers and great capacity, worthy of deeds of derring-do, yet
it cannot be denied that the narrowest impulses of human action drove the impetuous explorers
over the high Sierras. Gain alone buried them in the dim canons of the Yuba and American. The
sturdy citizens pouring in with their families, seeking homes; those who laid the enduring
foundations of the social fabric, the laws and enterprises of necessity, pith, and moment,
are the real fathers of the great Golden State. In the rapidity of settlement, all the manifold
labors of civilization began together. Laus Deo! There were hands, brains, and hearts for those
trying hours of the sudden acquisition of this royal domain.

The thoughtful scholar Nevins, throwing open the first public school-room to a little nursery-like
brood, planted the seeds of a future harvest, far richer than the output of the river treasuries.

A farmer's wife toiling over the long plains, caring for two beehives, mindful of the future,
introduced a future wealth, kinder in prophetic thought, than he who blindly stumbled on a bonanza.

Humble farmer, honest head of family, intelligent teacher, useful artisan, wise doctor, and
skilled mechanic, these were the real fathers of the State.

The sailor, the mechanic, and the good pioneer women, these are the heroes and heroines gratefully
remembered now. They regulated civilization; they stood together against the gold-maddened
floating miners; they fought the vicious camp-followers.

Maxime Valois, learned in the civil law of his native State, speaking French and Spanish, soon
plunged in the vexatious land litigation of his generation. Mere casual occupancy gave little
color of title to the commoner Mexicans. Now, the great grant owners are, one by one, cited
into court to prove their holdings; many are forced in by aggressive squatters.

While gold still pours out of the mines, and the young State feels a throbbing life everywhere,
the native Californians are sorely pressed between the land-getting and the mining classes.
Wild herds no longer furnish them free meat at will. The mustangs are driven away from their
haunts. Growing poverty cuts off ranch hospitality. Without courage to labor, the poorer Mexicans,
contemptuously called Greasers, go to the extremes of passive suffering. All the occupations
of the vaqueros are gone. These desperate Greasers are driven to horse-stealing and robbery.

Expert with lasso, knife, and revolver, they know every trail. These bandits mount themselves
at will from herds of the new-comers.

The regions of the north, the forests of the Sierras, and the lonely southern valleys give
them safe lurking-places. Wherever they reach a ranch of their people, they are protected;
the pursuers are baffled; they are misled by the sly hangers-on of these gloomy adobe houses.

In San Joaquin, the brigands hold high carnival; they sally out on wild rides across the upper
Sacramento. The mining regions are in terror. Herds of stolen horses are driven by the Livermore
Pass to the south. Cattle and sheep are divided; they are used for food. Sometimes the brands
are skilfully altered by addition or counterfeit.

Suspicious Mexicans are soon in danger. Short shrift is given to the horse-thief. The State
authorities are powerless in face of the duplicity of these native residents. They feel they
have been enslaved by the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. The roads became unsafe. Travellers
are subject to a sudden volley from ambush. The fatal lasso is one trick; the midnight stab,
when lodging in Mexican wayside houses, is another. There is no longer safety save in the large
towns. From San Diego to Shasta, a chain of criminals leaves a record of bloody deeds. There
are broader reasons than the mere friction of races. The native Californians are rudely treated
in the new courts; their personal rights are invaded; their homes are not secure; their women
are made the prey of infamous attack.

A deadly feud now rises between the Mexicans and Americans. These brutal encroachments of the
new governing race bring reprisals in chance duels and secret crimes. This organized robbery
is a return blow. The Americans are forced to travel in posses. They reinforce their sheriffs.
They establish armed messengers. In town and county they execute suspects by a lively applied
Lynch law.

All that is needed to create a general race-war is a determined leader.

As months roll on, the record of violence becomes alarming. Small stations are attacked, many
desperate fights occur. Dead men are weltering in their blood, on all the trails. A scheming
intelligence seems now to direct the bandits. Pity was never in the Mexican heart. But now
unarmed men are butchered while praying for mercy. Their bodies are wantonly gashed. Droves
of poor, plodding, unarmed Chinese miners are found lying dead like sheep in rows. Every trail
and road is unsafe. Different bodies of robbers, from five to twenty, operate at the same time.
There is no telegraph here as yet, to warn the helpless settlers. The following of treasure
trains shows that spies are aiding the bandits.

The leading men of the new State find this scourge unbearable. Lands are untenanted, cattle
and herds are a prey to the robbers. Private and public reward has failed to check this evil.
Sheriff's posses and occasional lynching parties shoot and hang. Still the evil grows. It is
an insult to American courage. As 1852 is ushered in, there are nearly two hundred and fifty
thousand dwellers in the new State. Still the reign of terror continues. One curious fact appears.
All of the bandits chased south toward Monterey or Los Angeles are finally driven to bay, killed,
or scattered as fugitives. In the middle regions, the organization of the Mexican murderers
seems to be aided by powerful friends. They evidently furnish news, supplies, and give concealment
to these modern butchers. They are only equalled by the old cutthroats of the Spanish main.

A meeting of citizens is called at Stockton. It is privately held, for fear of betrayal. Maxime
Valois is, as usual, in the van. His knowledge of the country and his renown as a member of
Fremont's party fit him to lead. A secret organization is perfected. The sheriff of the county
is made head of it. He can use the power of posse and his regular force. The plundered merchants
agree to furnish money as needed. Maxime Valois is needed as the directing brain. In study
over news and maps, the result proves that the coast and south are only used for the sale of
stock or for refuge.

The extreme north of the State shows no prey, save the starving Klamath Indians. It is true
the robbers never have cursed the upper mountains. Their control sweeps from Shasta to Sonoma,
from Marysville and Nevada as far as the gates of Sacramento, and down to the Livermore Pass.
Mariposa groans under their attacks.

Valois concludes this bloody warfare is a logical result of the unnecessary conquest of California.
To lose their nationality is galling. To see Mexico, which abandoned California, get $15,000,000
in compensation for the birthright of the Dons is maddening. It irritates the suspicious native
blood. To be ground down daily, causes continual bickering. Ranch after ranch falls away under
usury or unjust decisions. In this ably planned brigandage, Valois discerns some young resentful
Californian of good family has assisted. The terrific brutality points also to a relentless
daring nature, aroused by some special wrong.

Valois muses at night in his lonely office. His ready revolvers are at hand. Even here in Stockton
a Mexican, friendly to the authorities, has been filled with bullets by a horseman. The assailant
was swathed to his head in his scrape. He dashed away like the wind. There is danger everywhere.

The young lawyer pictures this, the daring bravo--hero by nature--made a butcher and a fiend
by goading sorrows. It must be some one who knows the Americans, who has travelled the interior,
and has personal wrongs to avenge.

These dark riders strike both innocent and guilty. They kill without reason, and destroy in
mere wantonness. The band has never been met in its full muster. The general operations are
always the same. It seems to Valois that there are two burning questions:

First--Who is the leader?

Second--Where is the hiding-place or stronghold?

To paralyze the band, this master intelligence must be neutralized by death. To finish the
work, that stronghold must be found or destroyed.

There is as yet no concurrent voice as to their leader. Maxime Valois is positive, however,
that the stronghold is not far from the slopes of Mariposa. The deadly riders seem to disappear,
when driven towards Stockton. They afterwards turn up, as if sure shelter was near.

But who will hound this fiend to his lair? Valois sends for the sheriff. They decide to organize
a picked corps of men. They will ride the roads, with leaders selected from veteran Indian
fighters. Others are old soldiers of the Mexican war. The heaviest rewards are offered, to
stimulate the capture of the bandit chiefs. Valois knows, though, that money will never cause
a Mexican to betray any countryman to the Americans. A woman's indiscretion, yes, a jealous
sweetheart's bitter hatred might lead to gaining the bandit chief's identity. But gold. Never!
The Mexicans never needed it, save to gamble. Judas is their national scapegoat.

The sheriff has collated every story of attack. Valois draws out the personality of the leading
actor in this revelry of death. A superb horseman, of medium size, who handles his American
dragoon revolvers with lightning rapidity. A young man in a yellow, black-striped scrape. He
is always superbly mounted. He has curling blackest hair. Two dark eyes, burning under bushy
brows, are the principal features. This man has either led the murderers or been present at
the fiercest attacks. In many pistol duels, he has killed some poor devil in plain sight of
his comrades.

Valois decides to search all towns where Spanish women abound, for such a romantic figure.
This bandit must need supplies and ammunition. He must visit women, the fandango, and the attractions
of monte. He must have friends to give him news of treasure movements. Valois watches secretly
the Spanish quarters of all the mountain towns and the great ranchos.

The Louisianian knows that every gambling-shop and dance-house is a centre of spies and marauders.
The throngs of unnoticed Mexicans, in a land where every traveller is an armed horseman, enable
these robber fiends to mingle with the innocent. The common language, hatred of the Americans,
the hospitality to criminals of their blood, and the admiration of the sullen natives for these
bravos, prevent any dependence on the Mexican population.

The pursuers have often failed because of lack of supplies, and worn-out steeds. The villains
are secretly refitted by those who harbor them. An hour suffices to drive up the "caballada,"
and remount the bandits at any friendly interior ranch.

Obstinate silence is all the roadside dwellers' return to questions.

Valois cons over the bloody record of the last two years. The desperate crimes begin with Andres
Armijo and Tomas Maria Carrillo. They were unyielding ex-soldiers. Both of these have been
run to earth. Salamon Pico, an independent bandit, of native blood, follows the same general
career. John Irving, a renegade American, has held the southern part of the State. With his
followers, he murdered General Bean and others. He was only an outcast foreigner.

Maxime Valois knows that Irving and his band have been butchered by savage Indians near the
Colorado. Yet none of these have killed for mere lust of blood. This mysterious chieftain who
murders for personal vengeance, is soon known to the determined Louisianian. In the long trail
of tiger-like assassinations, the robber is disclosed by his unequalled thirst for blood.

"Joaquin Murieta, Joaquin the Mountain Robber, Joaquin the Yellow Tiger." He flashes out from
the dark shades of night, or the depths of chaparral and forest. His insane butchery proves
Valois to be correct.

Dashing through camps, lurking around towns, appearing in distant localities, he robs stages,
plunders stations, and personally murders innocent travellers. Express riders are ambushed.
The word "Joaquin," scrawled on a monte card, and pinned to the dead man's breast, often tells
the tale. Lonely men are found on the trails with the fatal bullet-hole in the back of the
head, shot in surprise. Sometimes he appears with followers, often alone. Now openly daring
individual conflict, then slinking at night and in silence. Sneak, bravo, and tiger. He is
a Turpin in horsemanship. A fiend in his thirst for blood. A charmed life seems his. On magnificent
steeds, he rides down the fleeing traveller. He coolly murders the exhausted "Gringo," taunting
his hated race with cowardice. Sweeping from north to south, five hundred miles, this yellow-clad
fiend always keeps the Sacramento or San Joaquin between him and the coast. Men shudder at
the name of Joaquin Murieta.

Valois sees that the robber chief's permanent haunt is somewhere in the Sierras. This must
be found. The sheriffs of Placer, Nevada, Sierra, El Dorado, Tuolumne, Calaveras, and Mariposa
counties are in the field with posses. Skirmish after skirmish occurs. All doubtful men are
arrested. Yet the red record continues. Doubling on the pursuers, hiding, the bandit whirls
from Shasta to Tehama, from Oroville to Sacramento, from Marysville to Placerville. Stockton,
San Andreas, Sonora, and Mariposa are terrorized. Plundered pack-trains, murdered men, and
robbed wayfarers prove that Joaquin Murieta is ever at work. His swoop is unerring. The yellow
serape, black banded, the dark scowling face, and the battery of four revolvers, two on his
body, two on his saddle, soon make him known to all the State.

The Governor offers five thousand dollars State reward for Joaquin's head. County rewards are
also published. Valois watches all the leading Mexican families. Some wild son or member must
be unaccounted for. No criminal has yet appeared of good blood, save Tomas Maria Carrillo.
But he has been dead a year, shot in his tracks by a brave man. The bandits hover around Stockton.
The Americans go heavily armed, and only travel in large bodies. Public rage reaches its climax,
when there is found pinned on the body of a dead deputy-sheriff a printed proclamation of the
Governor of $5,000 for Joaquin's head.

Under the printed words is the scrawl:

"I myself will give ten thousand.

"JOAQUIN."

The passions of the Americans break loose. Innocent Mexicans are shot and hanged; all stragglers
driven out.

The San Joaquin valley becomes a theatre of continued conflict.

"Claudio," another dark chief, ravages the Salinas. He is the robber king of the coast. The
officers find a union between the coast and inland bandits. Now the manly settlers of the San
Joaquin rise in wrath. Texan rangers, old veterans, heroes of Comanche and Sioux battles, all
swear to hunt Joaquin Murieta to death.

Maxime Valois takes the saddle. He posts strong forces in the defiles opening to the coast.
A secret messenger leaves for Monterey. A vigorous attack on the coast bandits drives them
toward the inland passes.

"Claudio" and his followers are killed, after a bitter hand-to-hand duel. One or two are hanged.
Sheriff Cocks is the hero of the coast. Maxime Valois calls his ablest men together.

Dividing the main forces into several bodies, a leader is selected for each squad. Scouts are
thrown out. They report daily to the heads of divisions. The moving forces are ready to close
in and envelop their hated enemy.

Learning of the death of "Claudio," and that a strong body of Southern settlers is also in
the field, Maxime Valois feels the band of Joaquin is cut off in the square between Placerville
and Sonora, Stockton and the Sierras. It is agreed that the fortunate division striking the
robbers, shall follow the warm trail to the last man and horse. Reinforcements will push after
them.

The sheriff has charge of one, Maxime Valois of another, Captain Harry Love, a swarthy long-haired
Texan ranger, of the third. Love's magnificent horsemanship, his dark features, drooping mustache
and general appearance, might class him as a Spaniard. Blackened with the burning sun of the
plains, the deserts, and tropic Mexico, his cavalier locks sweep to his shoulders. The heavy
Kentucky rifle, always carried across his saddle, proves him the typical frontiersman and ranger.
He is a dead shot. Many a Comanche and guerilla have fallen under the unerring aim of Harry
Love. His agile frame, quickness with the revolver, and nerve with the bowie-knife, have made
him equally feared at close quarters.

In the dark hours of a spring morning of 1854, the main command breaks into its three divisions.
The sheriff covers the lines towards the north and San Andreas. Maxime skirts the Sierras.
Harry Love, marching silently and at night, hiding his command by day, marches towards Sonora.
He sweeps around and rejoins Valois' main body. The net is spread.

Scouts are distributed over this region. The mad wolf of the Sierras is at last to be hunted
to his lair.

The unknown retreat must be in the Sierras. He determines to throw his own command over the
valley towards the unvisited Lagunitas rancho. Padre Francisco will be there, a good adviser.
Valois, the rich and successful lawyer, is another man from the penniless prisoner of seven
years before. Knowing the hatred of Don Miguel for the Americans, he has never revisited the
place. Still he would like to meet the beloved padre again. He will not uselessly enrage the
gloomy lord of Lagunitas. Don Miguel is a hermit now.

Three days' march, skilfully concealed, brings him to the notched pass, where Lagunitas lies
under its sentinel mountains.

Brooding over the past, thinking of the great untravelled regions behind the grant, stories
from the early life of Don Miguel haunt the sleepless hours of the anxious young Southern leader.
He lies under the stars, wrapped in his blankets. Lagunitas, once more!

Up before day, filing through light forest and down the passes of the foothills, the command
threads its way. Valois calls his leading subordinates together. He arranges the visit to the
ranch. He sends a squad of five to ride down the roads a few miles, and meet any scouts or
vedettes of the other Southern party. Valois directs his men where to rejoin him. He points
out, a few miles ahead, a rocky cliff, behind which the rolling hills around Lagunitas offer
several hidden approaches to the rancho. Cautiously leading his men, to avoid a general alarm,
he skirts the woods. The party rides in Indian file, to leave a light trail only.

Before the frowning cliff is neared, Valois' keen eye sees his scouts straggling back. They
are galloping at rapid speed, making for the cliff. The whole command, with smoking steeds,
soon joins the scouts. With them are two of Love's outriders. The bandits are near at hand.
For the scouts, riding up all night from Love's body, have taken the main road. Within ten
miles they find several dead men--the ghastly handiwork of Joaquin. Their breathless report
is soon over. Detaching ten fresh men, with one of the news-bearers, to join Love and bring
him up post-haste, Maxime Valois orders every man to prepare his girths and arms for action.
Guided by the other scouts, the whole command pricks briskly over to the concealment of a rolling
valley. There is but one ridge between it, now, and Lagunitas.

Maxime calls up his aids. He gives them his rapid directions. Only the previous knowledge of
the ex-pathfinder enabled him to throw his men behind the sheltering ridge, unseen from the
old Don's headquarters.

In case of meeting any robbers, the subordinates are to seize and hold the ranch with ten determined
men. He throws the rest out in a strong line, to sweep east and south, till Love's column is
met. Winding into the glen, Valois takes five men and mounts the ridge.

He now skilfully nears the crest of the ridge. The main command is moving slowly, a few hundred
yards below. With the skill of the old scout of the plains, he brings his little squad up to
the shoulder of the ridge to the south of the rancho. Dismounting, Indian-like, he crawls up
to the summit, from which the beautiful panorama of glittering Lagunitas lies before him. By
his side is a tried friend. A life and death supporter.

Lagunitas again! It is backed by the forest, where swaying pines are singing the same old song
of seven long years ago. His eye sweeps over the scene.

Quick as a flash, Valois springs back to the horses. Two mounted cavaliers, followed by a serving
man, can be seen smartly loping away to the southeast. They are bending towards the region
where Love's course, the trail of the bandits, and Maxime's march intersect. Is it treachery?
Some one to warn the robbers!

Not a moment to lose! "Harris," cries Valois to his companion, "lead the main command over
to that mountain. Be ready to strike any moment. Send Hill and ten men to capture the ranch
by moving over the ridge. Keep every one there. Hold every human inmate. I'll cut these men
off." Away gallops Harris. Valois leads the four over the other spur. They drop down the eastern
slope of the point. The riders have to pass near. In rapid words he orders them to throw themselves
quickly, at a dead run, ahead of the travellers. He waits till, six or eight hundred yards
away, the strange horsemen pass the lowest point of the ridge. The first three scouts are now
well across the line of march of the quick-moving strangers. Then, with a word, "Now, boys,
remember!" Valois spurs his roan out into the open. At a wild gallop he cuts off the retreat
of the horsemen.

Ha! one turns. They are discovered. In an instant the wild mustangs are racing south. Valois
dashes along in pursuit. He has warned his men to use no firearms till absolutely necessary.
He shouts to his two followers to wait till the last. He would capture, not kill, these three
spies.

Out from the slopes below, the main column, at a brisk trot, cross the valley. They are led
by the quick-eyed scout, who knows how to throw them on the narrowing suspected region. Love's
men and the band of Joaquin, if here, must soon meet. The three men in advance ride up at different
points. They have seen pursuer and pursued galloping madly towards them. Instantly the man
following the first rider darts northward, and spurring up a ridge disappears, followed by
two of the three scouts in advance. The other rider draws up and stands his ground with his
servant. As Valois and his companions ride up, the crack, crack, crack, of heavy dragoon revolvers
is wafted over the ridge. It is now too late for prudence. The horseman at bay has wheeled.
Maxime recognizes the old Don.

Miguel Peralta is no man to be bearded in his own lair, unscathed. He spurs his horse back
towards the ranch. He fires rapidly into the three pursuers as he darts by. He is a dangerous
foe yet.

Valois feels a sharp pang in his shoulder. He reels in his saddle. His revolver lies in the
dust. The ringing reports of his body-guard peal out as they empty their pistols at fleeing
horse and man, The servant runs up, thoroughly frightened.

Don Miguel's best horse has made its last leap. It crashes down, pinioning the old soldier
to the ground. A bullet luckily has pierced its brain.

Before the old ranchero can struggle to his feet, his hands are twisted behind his back. A
couple of turns of a lariat clamp his wrists with no fairy band. A cocked pistol pressed against
his head tells him that the game is up.

Valois drops, half fainting, from his horse, while his men disarm and bind the sullen old Mexican.
The blood pouring from Valois' shoulder calls for immediate bandaging. The two pursuers of
the other fugitive now ride smartly back.

One lags along, with a torn and shattered jaw. His companion is unhurt. He bears across his
saddle bow a well-known emblem, the yellow and black scrape of Joaquin Murieta. Several ball
holes prove it might have been his shroud. Valois quickly interrogates the two; after a hasty
pistol duel, in which the flowing serape misled the two practised shots, the fugitive plunged
down a steep slope, with all the recklessness of a Californian vaquero. It was Joaquin!

When the pursuers reached the trail, it was marked by the abandoned blanket. A heavy saddle
also lay there, cut loose. Joaquin Murieta was riding away on the wings of the wind, but unwittingly
into the jaws of death. Two or three from the main body took up the trail. The whole body pushed
ahead on the track of the flying bandit--ready for fight.

With failing energies, Valois directs the unwounded pursuer to rejoin the column. He sends
stern orders to Harris, to spare neither man nor beast, to follow the trail to the last. Even
to the heart of the gloomy forests, this great human vampire must be hounded on his lonely
ride to death.

In the saddle, held up by his men, Maxime Valois toils slowly towards Lagunitas. Beside him
the wounded scout, pistol in hand, rides as a body-guard. In charge of growling old Don Miguel,
a man leads him, dismounted, by a lariat. His horse and trappings lie on the trail, after removing
all the arms. He is sullen and silent. His servant is a mere human animal. Cautiously approaching,
the plaza lies below them. In the square, the horses of the captors can be seen peacefully
grazing. Sentinels are mounted at several places. Valois at last reenters the old hacienda,
wounded, but in pride, as a conqueror.

He is met at the priest's door by Padre Francisco. Don Miguel Peralta, the last of the land
barons of the San Joaquin, is now a prisoner in the sacristy of the church. Time has its revenges.
The turns of fortune's wheel. Padre Francisco assembles the entire population of the home ranch
by the clanging of the church bell. In a few words he explains the reasons of the occupancy.
He orders the hired men to remain in the enclosure under the guard of the sentinels. He dresses
skilfully the wound of Maxime. He patches up the face of the wounded scout, whose proudest
future boast will be that Joaquin Murieta gave him those honorable scars.

Maxime, worn and faint, falls into a fevered sleep. His subordinate holds the ranch, with all
the force ready for any attack. The afternoon wears on. In sleep Valois forgets both the flying
bandit and his fate. The old Don, his eyes filled with scalding tears, rages in his bonds.
Pale, frightened Donna Juanita clasps her hands in the agony of prayer before the crucifix
in the chapel. Beside her stands Dolores, now a budding beauty, in radiant womanhood. The dark-eyed
young girl is mute. Her pathetic glances are as shy as a wounded deer's dying gaze. "The dreaded
Americanos."

Over the beautiful hills, fanned by the breezes of sunset, the softened shadows fall. Twilight
brings the hush and rest of early evening. The stars mirror themselves in the sparkling bosom
of Lagunitas.

Watching the wounded leader, Padre Francisco's seamed, thoughtful face is very grave. His thin
fingers tell the beads of the rosary. Prayer after prayer passes his moving lips.

The shadow of sorrow, sin, and shame is on Lagunitas. He fears for the future of the family.
There has been foul play. There the tiger of Sonora has made his lair in the trackless canons
and rich valleys of the foot-hills. The old Don must have known all.

Prayers for the dead and dying fall on the silence of the night. They are roughly broken by
the trampling of horses' feet. The priest is called out by the sentinel. By the dim light of
the stars, he sees two score shadowy horsemen. Between their lines, several poor wretches are
bound and shivering in captivity.

A swarthy figure swings from the saddle. Captain Harry Love springs across the threshold. Unmindful
of the warning of the priest, he rouses Valois. He cries exultantly, "We have him this time,
squire!" Lying on the portico, tied in the sack, in which it swung at the ranger's saddle-horn,
is the head of Joaquin Murieta. Valois struggles to his feet. Surrounded by the victors, by
the light of a torch, he gazes on the awful token of victory. As the timid priest sees the
fearful object, he cries, "Joaquin Carrillo!"

It is indeed he. The disgraced scion of an old and proud line. The good priest shudders as
Harry Love, leaning on the rifle which sent its ball into Joaquin's heart, calmly says, "That
thing is worth ten thousand dollars to me to-night, Valois!"

Already, swift riders are bringing up the forces of the sheriff. In the morning the history
is known. The converging columns struck the bandits, who scattered. The work of vengeance was
quick. "Three-fingered Jack," the murderous ancient of the bandit king, is killed in the camp.
Several fugitives are captured. Several more hung. Joaquin Murieta, exhausted in the flight
of the morning, his horse tired and wounded, drops from the charger, at a snap shot of the
intrepid ranger, Love. The robber has finished his last ride.

Valois recovers rapidly. He has much to do to stem the resentment of the pursuers. The head
of Joaquin and the hand of Three-fingered Jack are poor, scanty booty. Not as ghastly as the
half-dozen corpses swinging on Lagunitas' oaks, and ghastly trophies of a chase of months.
The prisoners are lynched. Far and wide, cowardly avengers butcher suspected Mexicans. California
breathes freely now. Joaquin Murieta Carrillo will weave no more guerilla plots.

The padre and Valois commune with the frightened lady of the hacienda. Donna Juanita implores
protection. Shy Dolores puts her slender hand in his, and begs him to protect her beloved father.

Maxime, in pity for the two women, conceals the history gathered from honorable Francois Ribaut.
Joaquin played skilfully upon Don Miguel's hatred of the Americans. He knew of the lurking
places behind Lagunitas. From these interior fastnesses, known to Don Miguel from early days,
Joaquin could move on several short lines. He thus appeared as if by magic. With confederates
at different places, his scattered bands had a rendezvous near Lagunitas. His followers mingled
with different communities, and were picked up here and there on his raids. Special attacks
were suggested by treasure movements. The murdering was not executed by the general banditti,
but by Joaquin alone, and one or two of his special bravos. Examining the captives, Padre Francisco,
by the agency of the Church, learned that, a few years before, a lovely Mexican girl, to whom
Joaquin was bound by a desperate passion, was the victim of foul outrage by some wandering
American brutes. Her death, broken-hearted, caused the desperado to swear her grave should
be watered with American blood. Pride of race, and a bitter thirst for revenge, made Joaquin
Murieta what he was,--a human scourge. His boyhood, spent roaming over the interior, rendered
him matchless in local topography.

It was possible to disguise the fact of supplies being drawn from Lagunitas. Don Miguel was
a great ranchero. As days rolled on, the plunder of the bandits was brought to the rancho.
Joaquin's mutilated body was a prey to the mountain wolf. The ghastly evidences of victory
were sent to San Francisco, where they remained for years, a reminder of bloody reprisal.

Padre Francisco saw with fear the rising indignation against Don Miguel. A clamor for his blood
arose. Maxime Valois plead for the old Commandante. He had really imagined Joaquin's vendetta
to be a sort of lawful war.

The forces began to leave Lagunitas. Only a strong escort body remained. Valois prepares his
departure.

In a last interview, with Padre Francisco present, the lawyer warned Don Miguel not to leave
his hacienda for some time. His life would surely be sacrificed to the feelings of the Americans.
Thankful for their safety, the mother and sweet girl Dolores gratefully bid adieu to Maxime.
He headed, himself, the last departing band of the invaders. The roads were safe to all. No
trace of treasures of Joaquin was found. Great was the murmuring of the rangers. Were these
hoards concealed on the rancho? Search availed nothing. Valois spurs down the road. Lagunitas!
He breathes freer, now that the avengers are balked, at Lagunitas. They would even sack the
rancho. Camping twenty miles away, Maxime dreams of his Southern home, as the stars sweep westward.

In the morning, a rough hand rouses him. It is the sentinel.

"Captain, wake up!"

He springs to his feet. "What is it?" he cries.

"Half the men are gone, sir. They have stolen back to hang the old Spaniard. They think he
has concealed Joaquin's treasures."

Valois rouses several tired friends.

"My horse!" he yells.

As he springs to the saddle, the sentinel tells him a friend disclosed the plot. Fear kept
him silent till the mutineers stole away.

"There are yet two hours to day. Is there time?" Maxime stretches out in the gallop of a skilled
plainsman. He must save the priest and the women at least.

The mutineers will wait till daylight for their swoop. They are mad with the thirst for the
lost treasures of Joaquin.

On, on, with the swing of the prairie wolf, the young leader gallops. He rides down man after
man. As he gallops he thinks of Senora Juanita, the defenceless priest, the wounded old Commandante,
and the sweet blossoming beauty of the Sierras, star-eyed young Dolores. They must be saved.
On, on!

Day points over the hills as Maxime dashes into the unguarded plaza of the ranch. There are
sounds of shots, yells, and trampling feet. He springs from his exhausted steed. The doors
of the ranch-house give way. He rushes to the entrance, to find the rooms empty. In a moment
he realizes the facts. He reaches the priest's house. Beating on the door, he cries: "Open
quick! It is Valois." Springing inside he finds Padre Francisco, his eyes lit up with the courage
of a gallant French gentleman.

"They are all here," he gasps. "Safe?" queries Valois. "Yes." "Thank God!" Maxime cries. "Quick!
Hurry them into the church. Hold the sacristy door."

Maxime's two or three friends have followed him. The doors are closed behind them. The heavy
adobe walls are shot-proof. The refuge of the church is gained none too soon.

The mutineers spread through the padre's house. Pouring in through the sacristy passage, they
are faced in the gray dawn by Valois, his eyes blazing. He holds a dragoon revolver in each
hand. He is a dead shot. Yet the mutineers are fearless.

"Give up the Greaser robber!" is their mad yell.

"Never!" cries Valois. "He is old and foolish, but he shall not be abused. Let him answer to
the law."

"Captain," cries one, "we don't want to hurt you, but we are going to find Joaquin's plunder."

"The first man who moves over this threshold is a dead man!" cries Valois.

No one cares to be first, but they rage wildly. They all gather for a rush. Weapons are ominously
clicking. As they come on, Padre Francisco stands before them, pale and calm in the morning light.

"Kill me first, my friends," he says. His body covers Valois.

The knot of desperate men stand back. They cannot shoot an unarmed priest, yet growling murmurs
are heard: "Burn them out," "Go ahead,"

"Shoot the old Greaser."

A sound of trampling hoofs drowns their cries. The main body of the detachment, stung with
shame, have galloped back to rescue Valois. It is over. The mutineers sullenly retire in a body.

Three hours later the detachment rides off. The rebels have wandered away. Guarded by the friends
of the wild night-ride, Valois remains at Lagunitas.

Under questioning of the padre, whose honorable French blood boils at the domain being made
a nest of assassins, the Don describes Joaquin's lurking-places. With one or two mozos, Valois
visits all the old camps of the freebooters, within seventy-five miles. He leaves his men at
Lagunitas for safety. He threads the fastnesses of the inviolate forests. They stretch from
Shasta to Fresno, the great sugar pines and redwoods of California.

The axe of man has not yet attacked them. No machinery, no tearing saws are in these early
days destroying their noble symmetry. But they are doomed. Fires and wanton destruction are
yet to come, to leave blackened scars over once lovely areas. Man mutilates the lovely face
of Nature's sweetest sylvan retreats. Down the great gorge of the Yosemite, Valois rides past
the giant Big Trees of Calaveras. He finds no hidden treasures, no buried deposits. The camps
near Lagunitas disclose only some concealed supplies. No arms, valuables, and treasures, torn
from the murdered travellers, in the two years' red reign of Joaquin, the Mountain Tiger.

Valois concludes that Joaquin divided the gold among his followers. He must have used it largely
to purchase assistance from his spies, scattered through the interior.

The stolen animals were undoubtedly all scattered over the State. The weapons, saddlery, and
gear, booty of the native horse-thief bands, have been sent as far as Chihuahua in Mexico.
Valuable personal articles were scarce. Few trophies were ever recovered. The gold-dust was
unrecognizable. Valois reluctantly gives up the search. He returns convinced that mere lust
of blood directed Joaquin Murieta Carrillo.

The bandits under him represented the native discontent. Their acts were a protest against
the brutal Americans. They were goaded on by the loss of all property rights. This harshness
drove the Indians, decimated, drunken, and diseased, from their patrimonial lands. It has effected
the final ruin of the native Californians. Frontier greed and injustice have done a shameful work.

Maxime Valois blushes for his own nation. He realizes that indigenous dwellers must go to the
wall in poverty, to their death. They go down before the rush of the wolf pack, hunting gold,
always gold.

Taking the precaution to leave men to bear to him any messages from the padre, Maxime leaves
Lagunitas for Stockton. The affairs of the community call him home. Property, covered by his
investments, has been exposed to fire and flood at Sacramento. Sari Francisco has been half
destroyed by a great conflagration. These calamities make thousands penniless.

Before he rides away, old Don Miguel comes to say adieu to his savior, once his prisoner. "Senor
Americano," he murmurs, "be pleased to come to my house." Followed by the padre, Valois enters.
There Don Miguel bids Donna Juanita and Dolores thank the man who saved his life.

"I shall not be here long, Senor Abogado," he says; "I wish you and the padre to watch over
my wife and child. YOU are a 'caballero' and 'buen Cristiano.'"

Padre Francisco has proved that the young leader is a true child of the Church.

The finest horse on the rancho is led to the door. It is trapped with Don Miguel's state equipment.
With a wave of the hand, he says:

"Senor, vayase V. con Dios. That horse will never fail you. It is the pride of the Lagunitas
herds."

Maxime promises to aid in any future juncture. He rides out from lonely Lagunitas, near which
tradition to-day locates those fabulous deposits, the vanished treasures of Joaquin, the mountain
robber.

A generation glides away. The riches, long sought for, are never found. This blood-stained
gold may lie hidden beneath the soil of Mariposa, but it is beyond human ken.

There are wild rejoicings at Stockton. Harry Love, splendid in gayest trappings, is the hero
of the hour. The dead mountain tiger was the last leader of resistance to the Americans. The
humbled Mexicans sink into the condition of wandering helots. The only possession left is their
unconquerable pride, and the sadness which wraps them in a gloomy mantle.

Through the mines runs a paean of rejoicing. The roads are free; Joaquin is slain at last.
Butcher bravos tire of revenging past deeds of blood. They slay the helpless Indians, or assassinate
the frightened native Californians. This rude revenge element, stirred up by Harry Love's exploit,
reaches from Klamath to the Colorado. Yet the unsettled interior is destined to keep up the
sporadic banditti of the valleys for years. Every glen offers an easy ambush. In the far future
only, the telegraph and railway will finally cut up the great State into localized areas of
civilization.

All the whiskey-drinking and revolver-carrying bravos must be swept into obscure graves before
crime can cease. It becomes, however, occasional only. While bloody hands are ready, the plotting
brain of Joaquin Murieta never is equalled by any future bandit.

Coming years bring Francisco Garcia, Sebastian Flores, and the "Los Manilas" gang, whose seventeen
years of bloodshed end finally at the gallows of Los Angeles. Varrella and Soto, Tiburcio Vasquez,
Santos Lotello, Chavez, and their wild Mexican brothers, are all destined to die by shot or rope.

"Tom Bell," "Jack Powers," and other American recruits in the army of villany, have only changed
sides in their crimes. All these wretches merit the deaths awaiting them. The last purely international
element of discord vanishes from the records of crime.

Wandering Americans aptly learn stage-robbing. They are heirs of the old riders. The glories
of "Black Bart," the lone highwayman of eighty stage-robberies, and the "train robbers," are
reserved for the future. But Black Bart never takes life. He robs only the rich.

Valois appreciates that the day has arrived when legal land spoliation of the Mexicans will
succeed these violent quarrels. Nothing is left to steal but their land. That is the object
of contention between lawyers, speculators, squatters, and the defenceless owners. Their domains
narrow under mortgage, interest, and legal (?) robbery.

"Vae victis!" The days of confiscation follow the conquest.

Hydraulic mining, quartz processes, and corporate effort succeed the earlier mining attempts.
Two different forces are now in full energy of action.

Hills are swept bodily into the river-beds, in the search for the underlying gold. Rivers and
meadows are filled up, sand covered, and ruined. Forests are thrown down, to rot by wholesale.
Tunnels are blasted out. The face of nature is gashed with the quest for gold. Banded together
for destruction, the miners leave no useful landmark behind them. All is washed away and sent
seaward in the choking river-channels.

The home-makers, in peaceful campaigns of seed-time and harvest, develop new treasures. Great
interests are introduced. The gold of field, orchard, and harvest falls into the hands of the
industrious farmers. These are the men whose only weapons are scythe and sickle. They are the
real Fathers of the Pacific. Roving over the interior, the miners leave a land as nearly ruined
as human effort can render it. In the wake of these nugget-hunters, future years bring those
who make the abandoned hills lovely with scattered homes. They are now hidden by orchards,
vineyards, and gardens. Peaceful flocks and herds prove that the Golden Age of California is
not to be these wild days of the barbaric Forty-niner.

Maxime Valois sees the land sweeping in unrivalled beauty to the Colorado. Free to the snowy
peaks of the Sacramento, the rich plains roll. He knows that there will be here yet,

"Scattered cities crowning these, Whose far white walls along them shine, With fields which
promise corn and wine."

He realizes that transient California must yield to stable conditions. Some civilized society
will succeed the masses as lacking in fibre as a rope of sand. Already the days of roving adventure
are over. There are wanderers, gamblers, fugitives, ex-criminals, and outcasts enough within
the limits of the new land. Siren and adventuress, women of nameless history and gloomy future,
yet abound. They throng the shabby temporary camps or tent cities. He knows there is no self-perpetuation
in the mass of men roving in the river valleys. Better men must yet rule.

A visit to San Francisco and other large places proves that the social and commercial element
is supplied from the Northern, Eastern, and Middle States. Their professional men will be predominant
also.

In the interior, the farmers of the West and the sagacious planters of the South control.

As May-day approaches, Valois, at San Francisco in 1853, sees a procession of growing children.
There, thousands of happy young faces of school-children, appear bearing roses in innocent hands.

Philip Hardin gives him the details of the coming struggle of North and South. It is a battle
for the coast from Arizona to Oregon. Lost to England, Russia, and France, lost to the Mormons
by stupidity or neglect, this West is lost to the South by the defeat of slavery. Industrious
farmers come, in fairly equal numbers, from the Northern and Southern agricultural States.
The people of the Atlantic free States come with their commerce, capital, and institutions.
The fiat of Webster, Clay, and Seward has placed the guardian angel of freedom at the gates
and passes of California. The Southerner cannot transfer his human slave capital to the far
West. The very winds sing freedom's song on the wooded heights of the Sierras.

Philip Hardin sighs, as he drains his glass, "Valois, our people have doomed the South to a
secondary standing in the Union. This fatal blunder in the West ruins us. Benton and Fremont's
precipitancy thwarted our statesmen. This gold, the votes of these new States, the future commerce,
the immense resources of the West, all are cast in the balance against us. We must work for
a Western republic. We must wait till we can fight for Southern rights. We will conquer these
ocean States. We will have this land yet."

The legal Mephisto and his pupil are true to the Southern cause. Neither of them can measure
the coming forces of Freedom. Rosalie Leese, the pioneer white child of California, born in
1838, at Yerba Buena, was the first of countless thousands of free-born American children.
In the unpolluted West the breath of slavery shall never blight a single human existence. Old
Captain Richardson and Jacob Leese, pioneers of the magic city of San Francisco, gaze upon
the beautiful ranks of smiling school-children, in happy troops. They have no regrets, like
the knights of slavery, to see their places in life filled by free-born young pilgrims of life.
All hail the native sons and daughters of the Golden West!

But the Southern politicians forge to the front. The majority is still with them. They carry
local measures. Their hands are only tied by the admission of California, as a free State.
Too late! On the far borders of Missouri, the contest of Freedom and Slavery begins. It excites
all America. Bleeding Kansas! Hardin explains that the circle of prominent Southerners, leading
ranchers, Federal officials, and officers of the army and navy, are relied on for the future.
The South has all the courts. It controls the legislature. It seeks to cast California's voice
against the Union in the event of civil war. As a last resort they will swing it off in a separate
sovereignty--a Lone Star of the West.

"We must control here as we did in Texas, Valois. When the storm arises, we will be annexed
to the Southern Confederacy."

Even as he spoke, the generation of the War was ripening for the sickle of Death. Filled with
the sectional glories of the Mexican war, Hardin could not doubt the final issue.

"Get land, Valois," he cries. "Localize yourself. When this State is thrown open to slavery,
you will want your natural position. Maxime, you ought to have a thousand field-hands when
you are master at Lagunitas. You can grow cotton there."

Valois muses. He revolves in his mind the "Southern movement." Is it treason? He does not stop
to ask. As he journeys to Stockton he ponders. Philip Hardin is about to accept a place on
the Supreme Bench of the State. Not to advance his personal fortunes, but to be useful to his
beloved South.

While the banks, business houses and factories are controlled by Northern men: while the pothouse
politicians of Eastern cities struggle in ward elections, the South holds all the Federal honors.
They govern society, dominate in the legislature and in the courts. They dictate the general
superior intercourses of men. The ardent Southrons rule with iron hand. They are as yet only
combated by the pens of Northern-born editors, and a few fearless souls who rise above the
meekly bowing men of the free States.

All see the approaching downfall of lawless pleasure and vicious license in San Francisco.
Slowly the tide of respectable settlement rises. It bears away the scum of vice, swept into
the Golden Gates in the first rush. The vile community of escaped convicts and mad adventurers
cannot support itself. "The old order changeth, yielding slowly to the new."

At the head of all public bodies, the gentleman of the South, quick to avenge his personal
honor, aims, with formal "code," and ready pistol, to dragoon all public sentiment. He is sworn
to establish the superiority of the cavalier.

The first Mayor of San Francisco, a Congressman elect, gifted editor Edward Gilbert, has already
fallen in an affair of honor. The control of public esteem depends largely on prowess in the
duelling field. Every politician lives up to the code.

Valois ponders over Hardin's advice. Averse to routine business, fond of a country life, he
decides to localize himself. His funds have increased. His old partner, Joe Woods, is now a
man of wealth at Sacramento. Maxime has no faith in quartz mines. He has no desires to invest
in ship, or factory. He ignores commerce. To be a planter, a man of mark in the legislature,
to revive the glories of the Valois family, is the lawyer's wish. While he passes the tule-fringed
river-banks, fate is leading him back to Lagunitas. He has led a lonely life, this brilliant
young Creole. In the unrest of his blood, under the teachings of Hardin, Valois feels the future
may bear him away to unfought fields. The grandsons of those who fought at New Orleans, may
win victories, as wonderful, over the enemies of that South, even if these foes are brothers born.

Gliding towards his fate, the puppet of the high gods, Maxime Valois may dream of the surrender
of Fort Sumter, and of the Southern Cross soaring high in victory. Appomattox is far hidden
beyond battle-clouds of fields yet to come! The long road thither has not yet been drenched
with the mingled blood of warring brethren. Dreams! Idle dreams! Glory! Ambition! Southern rights!

At Stockton, Valois receives tidings from Padre Francisco. Clouds are settling down on Lagunitas.
Squatters arc taking advantage of the defenceless old Mexican. If the Don would save his broad
acres, he must appear in the law-courts of the conquerors.

Alas! the good old days are gone, when the whole State of California boasted not a single lawyer.
These are new conditions. The train of loyal retainers will never sweep again out of the gates
of Lagunitas, headed by the martial Commandante, in all the bravery of rank and office. It
is the newer day of gain and greed.

Prospecting miners swarm over Mariposa. The butterflies are driven from rocky knoll and fragrant
bower by powder blasts. The woods fall under the ringing axe of the squatter. Ignorant of new
laws and strange language; strong only in his rights; weak in years, devoid of friends, Don
Miguel's hope is the sage counsel of Padre Francisco. The latter trusts to Valois' legal skill.

As adviser, Valois repairs to Lagunitas. Old patents, papers heavy with antique seal and black
with stately Spanish flourish, are conned over. Lines are examined, witnesses probed, defensive
measures taken.

Maxime sits; catechizes the Don, the anxious Donna Juanita, and the padre. Wandering by the
shores of Lagunitas, Valois notes the lovely reflection of the sweet-faced Dolores in the crystal
waters. The girl is fair and modest. Francois Ribaut often wonders if the young man sees the
rare beauty of the Spanish maiden. If it would come to pass!

Over his beads, the padre murmurs, "It may be well. All well in time."

The cause drags on slowly. After months, the famous case of the Lagunitas rancho is fought and won.

But before its last coil has dragged out of the halls of justice, harassed and broken in spirit,
Don Miguel closes his eyes upon the ruin of his race. Born to sorrow, Donna Juanita is a mere
shade of womanly sorrow. She is not without comfort, for the last of the Peraltas has placed
his child's hand in that of Maxime Valois and whispered his blessing.

"You will be good to my little Dolores, amigo mio," murmurs the old man. He loves the man whose
lance has been couched in his behalf. The man who saved his life and lands.

Padre Francisco is overjoyed. He noted the drawing near of the young hearts. A grateful flash,
lighting the shining eyes of Dolores, told the story to Maxime. His defence of her father,
his championship of the family cause, his graceful demeanor fill sweet Dolores' idea of the
perfect "caballero."

The priest with bell, book, and candle, gives all the honors of the Church to the last lord
of Lagunitas. Hard by the chapel, the old ranchero rests surrounded by the sighing forest.
It is singing the same unvarying song, breathing incense from the altars of nature over the
stout soldier's tomb.

He has fought the fight of his race in vain. When the roses' leaves drift a second time on
the velvet turf, Maxime Valois receives the hand of Dolores from her mother. The union is blessed
by the invocation of his priestly friend. It is a simple wedding. Bride and groom are all in
all to each other. There are none of the Valois, and not a Peralta to join in merrymaking.

Padre Francisco and Donna Juanita are happy in the knowledge that the shy bird of the mountains
is mated with the falcon-eyed Creole. He can defend the lordly heritage of Lagunitas. So, in
the rosy summer time, the foot of the stranger passes as master over the threshold of the Don's
home. The superb domain passes under the dominion of the American. One by one the old holdings
of the Californian families pass away. The last of the Dons, sleeping in the silence of the
tomb, are spared the bitterness of seeing their quaint race die out. The foreigner is ruling
within their gates. Their unfortunate, scattered, and doomed children perish in the attrition
of a newer civilization.

Narrow-minded, but hospitable; stately and loyal; indifferent to the future, suspicious of
foreigners, they are utterly unable to appreciate progress. They are powerless to develop or
guard their domains. Abandoned by Mexico, preyed on by squatters, these courtly old rancheros
are now a memory of the past.

This wedding brings life to Lagunitas. The new suzerain organizes a working force. It is the
transition period of California. Hundreds of thousands of acres only wait for the magic artesian
well to smile in plenty. Valois gathers up the reins. Only a few pensioners remain. The nomadic
cavalry of the natives has disappeared. The suggestion of "work" sets them "en route." They
drift towards the Mexican border. The flocks and herds are guarded by corps of white attendants.
The farm succeeds the ranch.

Maxime Valois gives his wife her first sight of the Queen City. The formalities of receiving
the "patent" call him to San Francisco.

Padre Francisco remains with Donna Juanita. The new rule is represented by "Kaintuck," an energetic
frontiersman, whose vast experience in occasional warfare and frequent homicide is a guarantee
of finally holding possession. This worthy left all his scruples at home in Kentucky, with
his proper appellation. He is a veteran ranger.

As yet the lands yield no regular harvests. The ten-leagues-square tract produces less fruit,
garden produce, and edibles, than a ten-acre Pennsylvania field in the Wyoming. But the revenue
is large from the cattle and horses. The cattle are as wild as deer. The horses are embodiments
of assorted "original sin," and as agile as mountain goats. Valois knows, however, the income
will be ample for general improvements.

His policy matures. He encourages the settlement of Southerners. He rents in subdivisions his
spare lands.

The Creole, now a landlord, hears the wails of short-sighted men. They mourn the green summers,
the showery months of the East. Moping in idleness, they assert that California will produce
neither cereal crops, fruits, nor vegetables. Prophets, indeed! The golden hills look bare
and drear to strangers' eyes. The brown plains please not.

In the great realm, apples, potatoes, wheat, corn, the general cereals and root crops are supposed
to be impossible productions. Gold, wild cattle, and wilder mustangs are the returns of El
Dorado. Cultivation is in its infancy.

The master departs with the dark-eyed bride. She timidly follows his every wish. Dolores has
the education imparted by gentle Padre Francisco. It makes her capable of mentally expanding
in the experiences of the first journey. The gentle refinement of her race completes her charms.

To the bride, the steamer, the sights of the bay, crowded with shipping, and the pageantry
of the city are dazzling. The luxuries of city life are wonders. Relying on her husband, she
glides into her new position. Childishly pleased at the jewels, ornaments, and toilets soon
procured in the metropolis, Donna Dolores Valois is soon one of Eve's true daughters, arrayed
like the lily.

Months roll away. The stimulus of a brighter life develops the girl wife into a sweetly radiant
woman.

Maxime Valois rejoins Philip Hardin. He is now a judge of the Supreme Court. Stormy days are
these of 1855 and the spring of 1856.

Deep professional intrigues busy Valois. Padre Francisco and "Kaintuck" announce the existence
of supposed quartz mines on the rancho. Valois will not pause in his occupations to risk explorations.

For the Kansas strife, the warring of sections, and the growing bitterness of free and slave
State men make daily life a seething cauldron. Southern settlers are pouring into the interior.
They shun the cities. In city and country, squatter wars, over lot and claim, excite the community.
San Francisco is a hotbed of politicians and roughs of the baser sort. While the Southerners
generally control the Federal and State offices, Hardin feels the weakness in their lines has
been the journalistic front of their party. Funds are raised. Pro-slavery journals spring into
life. John Nugent, Pen Johnston, and O'Meara write with pens dipped in gall, and the ready
pistol at hand. Tumult and fracas disgrace bench, bar, legislature, and general society. The
great wars of Senators Gwin and Broderick precede the separation of Northern and Southern Democrats.
As the summer of 1856 draws on, corruption, violence, and sectional hatred bitterly divide
all citizens. School and Church, journal and law-giver, work for the right. The strain on the
community increases. While the coast and interior is dotted with cities and towns, and the
Mint pours out floods of ringing gold coins, there is no confidence. Farm and factory, ship
and wagon train, new streets, extension of the city and material progress show every advancement.
But a great gulf yawns between the human wave of old adventurers, and the home-makers, now
sturdily battling for the inevitable victory.

The plough is speeding in a thousand furrows everywhere. Cattle and flocks are being graded
and improved. Far-sighted men look to franchise and public association. The day dawns when
the giant gaming hells, flaunting palaces of sin, and the violent army of miscreants must be
suppressed.

Everywhere, California shows the local irritation between the buccaneers of the first days,
and the resolute, respectable citizens. The latter are united in this local cause, though soon
to divide politically on the battle-field.

Driven from their lucrative vices of old, the depraved element, at the polls, overawes decency.
San Francisco's long wooden wharves, its precipitous streets, its crowded haunts of the transient,
and its flashy places of low amusement harbor a desperate gang. They are renegades, deserters,
and scum of every seaport--graduates of all human villany. Aided by demagogues, the rule of
the "Roughs" nears its culmination. Fire companies, militia, train bands, and the police, are
rotten to the core. In this upheaval, affecting only the larger towns, the higher classes are
powerless.

Cut off, by the great plains, from the central government, the State is almost devoid of telegraphs
and has but one little railroad. It has hostile Indians yet on its borders. The Chinese come
swarming in like rats. The situation of California is critical.

Personal duels and disgraceful quarrels convulse high life. The lower ranks are ruled only
by the revolver. The criminal stalks boldly, unpunished, in the streets.

The flavor of Americanism is no leaven to this ill-assorted population. The exciting presidential
campaign, in which Fremont leads a new party, excites and divides the better citizens of the
commonwealth.

Though the hills are now studded with happy homes and the native children of the Golden West
are rising in promise, all is unrest. A local convulsion turns the anger of better elements
into the revolution of the Vigilance Committee of 1856. James Casey's pistol rang out the knell
of the "Roughs" when he murdered the fearless editor of the leading journal.

Valois, uninterested in this urban struggle, returns to Lagunitas. His domain rewards his energy.

All is peace by the diamond lake. Senora Dolores, her tutor, Padre Francisco, and the placid
Duenna Juanita make up a pleasant home circle. It is brightened by luxuries provided by the
new lord. Maxime Valois' voice is heard through the valleys. He travels in support of James
Buchanan, the ante-bellum President. For is not John C. Breckinridge, the darling son of the
South, as vice-president also a promise of Southern success?

San Francisco throws off its criminals by a spasmodic effort. The gallows tree has borne its
ghastly fruit. Fleeing "Roughs" are self-expatriated. Others are unceremoniously shipped abroad.
The Vigilance Committee rules. This threshing out of the chaff gives the State a certain dignity.
At least, an effort has been made to purge the community. All in all, good results--though
a Judge of the Supreme Court sleeps in a guarded cell as a prisoner of self-elected vindicators
of the law.

When the excitement of the presidential election subsides, Maxime Valois joins the banquets
of the Democratic victors. The social atmosphere is purer. Progress marks the passing months.
The State springs forward toward the second decade of its existence. There is local calm, while
the national councils potter over the Pacific railways. Valois knows that the great day of
Secession approaches. The Sons of the South will soon raise the banner of the Southern Cross.
He knows the purposes of the cabinet, selected by the conspirators who surround Buchanan. Spring
sees the great departments of the government given over to those who work for the South. They
will arrange government offices, divide the army, scatter the navy, juggle the treasury and
prepare for the coming storm. The local bitterness heightens into quarrels over spoils. Judge
Philip Hardin, well-versed in the Secession plots, feeds the ever-burning pride of Valois.
From Kansas, from court and Congress, from the far East, the murmur of the "irrepressible conflict"
grows nearer. Maxime Valois is in correspondence with the head of his family. While at Lagunitas,
the Creole pushes on his works of improvement. He dreams at night strange dreams of more brilliant
successes. Of a new flag and the triumph of the beloved cause. He will be called as a trusted
Southron into the councils of the coast. Will they cut it off under the Lone Star flag? This
appeals to his ambition.

There are omens everywhere. The Free-State Democrats must be suppressed. The South must and
shall rule.

He often dreams if war and tumult will ever roll, in flame and fire, over the West. The mists
of the future veil his eyes. He waits the signal from the South. All over California, the wealth
of the land peeps through its surface gilding. There are no clouds yet upon the local future.
No burning local questions at issue here, save the aversion of the two sections, distrustful
of each other.

It needs only the mad attack of John Brown upon Virginia's slave-keepers to loose the passions
of the dwellers by the Pacific. Martyr or murderer, sage or fanatic, Brown struck the blows
which broke the bonds of the brotherhood of the Revolution. From the year 1858, the breach
becomes too great to bridge. Secretly, Southern plans are perfected to control the West. While
the conspiracy slowly moves on, the haughtiness of private intercourse admits of no peaceable
reunion. Active correspondence between officials, cool calculations of future resources, and
the elevation to prominent places of men pledged to the South, are the rapid steps of the maturing
plans. On the threshold of war.

For the senators, representatives, and agents in Washington confidentially report that the
code of honor is needed to restrain the Northerners under personal dragooning. Yankee self-assertion
comes at last.

Around the real leaders of thought their vassals are ranged. Davis, Toombs, Breckinridge, Yancey,
Pryor, Wigfall, Wise, and others direct. Herbert, Keith, Lamar, Brooks, and a host of cavaliers
are ready with trigger and cartel. The tone at Washington gives the keynote to the Californian
agents of the Southern Rights movement. There are not enough Potters, Wades, and Landers, as
yet. The Northern mind needs time to realize the deliberation of Secession.

The great leaders of the free States are dead or in the gloomy retirement of age. Webster and
Clay are no more. There are yet men of might to fight under the banners streaming with the
northern lights of freedom. Douglas, Bell, Sumner, Seward, and Wade are drawing together. Grave-faced
Abraham Lincoln moves out of the background of Western woods into the sunrise glow of Liberty's
brightest day.

On the Pacific coast, restraint has never availed. Here, ancestry and rank go for naught. Here,
men meet without class pride. The struggle is more equal.

California's Senator, David C. Broderick, was the son of an humble New York stone-cutter. He
grapples with his wily colleague, Senator Gwin.

It is hammer against rapier. Richard and Saladin. Beneath the banners of the chieftains the
free lances of the Pacific range themselves. Neither doubts the courage of the opposing forces.
The blood of the South has already followed William Walker, the gray-eyed man of destiny, to
Sonora and Nicaragua. They were a splendid band of modern buccaneers. Henry A. Crabbe found
that the Mexican escopetas are deadly in the hands of the maddened inhabitants of Arispe. Raousset
de Boulbon sees his Southern followers fall under machete and revolver in northern Mexico.
The Southern filibusters are superbly reckless. All are eager to repeat the glories of Texas
and Mexico. They find that the Spanish races of Central America have learned bitter lessons
from the loss of Texas. They know of the brutal conquest of California. The cry of "Muerte
los Americanos!" rings from Tucson to Darien. The labors of conquest are harder now for the
self-elected generalissimos of these robber bands. "Extension of territory" is a diplomatic
euphemism for organized descents of desperate murderers. The wholesome lessons of the slaughter
in Sonora, the piles of heads at Arispe, and the crowded graves of Rivas and Castillo, with
the executions in Cuba, prove to the ambitious Southrons that they will receive from the Latins
a "bloody welcome to hospitable graves."

As the days glide into weeks and months, the thirst for blood of the martial generation overcrowding
the South is manifest. On the threshold of grave events the leaders of Southern Rights restrain
further foreign attempts. The chivalry is now needed at home. Foiled in Cuba and Central America,
restrained by the general government from a new aggressive movement on Mexico, they decide
to turn their faces to the North. They will carve out a new boundary line for slavery.

The natural treasury of the country is an object of especial interest. To break away peaceably
is hardly possible. But slavery needs more ground for the increasing blacks. It must be toward
the Pacific that the new Confederacy will gain ground. Gold, sea frontage, Asiatic trade, forests
and fisheries,--all these must come to the South. It is the final acquisition of California.
It was APPARENTLY for the Union, but REALLY for the South, that the complacent Polk pounced
upon California. He waged a slyly prepared war on Mexico for slavery.

As the restraints of courtesy and fairness are thrown off at Washington, sectional hostilities
sweep over to the Western coast. The bitterness becomes intense. Pressing to the front, champions
of both North and South meet in private encounters. They admit of neither evasion nor retreat.

Maxime Valois is ready to shed his blood for the land of the palmetto. But he will not degrade
himself by low intrigue or vulgar encounter.

He learns without regret of the extinction of the filibusters in Sonora, on the Mexican coast,
Cuba, and Central America. He knows it is mad piracy.

Valois sorrows not when William Walker's blood slakes the stones of the plaza at Truxillo.
A consummation devoutly to be wished.

It is for the whole South he would battle. It is the glorious half of the greatest land on
the globe. For HER great rights, under HER banner, for State sovereignty he would die. On some
worthy field, he would lead the dauntless riflemen of Louisiana into the crater of death.

THERE, would be the patriot's pride and the soldier's guerdon of valor. He would be in the
van of such an uprising. He scorns to be a petty buccaneer, a butcher of half-armed natives,
a rover and a robber. In every scene, through the days of 1859, Valois bears himself as a cavalier.
Personal feud was not his object.

In the prominence of his high position, Valois travels the State. He confers with the secret
councils at San Francisco. He is ready to lead in his regions when needed. The dark cabal of
Secession sends out trusty secret agents, even as Gillespie and Larkin called forth the puppets
of Polk, Buchanan and Marcy to action. Valois hopes his friends can seize California for the
South. Fenced off from Oregon and the East by the Sierras, there is the open connection with
the South by Arizona.

A few regiments of Texan horse can hold this great gold-field for the South. Valois deems it
impossible for California to be recaptured if once won. He knows that Southern agents are ready
to stir up the great tribes of the plains against the Yankees. The last great force, the United
States Navy, is to be removed. Philip Hardin tells him how the best ships of the navy are being
dismantled, or ordered away to foreign stations. Great frigates are laid up in Southern navy-yards.
Ordnance supplies and material are pushed toward the Gulf. Appropriations are expended to aid
these plans. The leaders of the army, now scattered under Southern commanders, are ready to
turn over to the South the whole available national material of war. Never dreaming of aught
but success, Valois fears only that he may be assigned to Western duties. This will keep him
from the triumphal marches over the North. He may miss the glories of that day when Robert
Toombs calls the roll of his blacks at Bunker Hill Monument. In the prime of life and vigor
of mind, he is rich. He has now a tiny girl child, gladdening sweet Senora Dolores. His domain
blossoms like the rose. Valois has many things to tie him to San Joaquin. His princely possessions
alone would satisfy any man. But he would leave all this to ride with the Southern hosts in
their great northward march. Dolores sits often lonely now, on the porch of the baronial residence
which has grown up around the Don's old adobe mansion. Her patient mother lies under the roses,
by the side of Don Miguel.

Padre Francisco, wearied of the mental death in life of these lonely hills, has delayed his
return to France only by the appeals of Maxime Valois. He wants a friend at Lagunitas if he
takes the field. If he should be called East, who would watch over his wife and child? Francois
Ribaut, a true Frenchan at heart, looks forward to some quiet cloister, where he can see once
more the twin towers of Notre Dame. The golden dome of the Invalides calls him back. He sadly
realizes that his life has been uselessly wasted. The Indians are either cut off, chased away,
or victims of fatal diseases. The Mexicans have fallen to low estate. Their numbers are trifling.
He has no flock. He is only a lonely shepherd. With the Americans his gentle words avail nothing.
The Catholics of the cities have brought a newer Church hierarchy with them. "Home to France,"
is his longing now.

In the interior, quarrels bring about frequent personal encounters between political disputants.
The Northern sympathizers, stung by jeer, and pushed to the wall, take up their weapons and
stand firm--a new fire in their eyes. The bravos of slavery meet fearless adversaries. In the
cities, the wave of political bitterness drowns all friendly impulses. Every public man takes
his life in his hand. The wars of Broderick and Gwin, Field and Terry, convulse the State.
Lashed into imprudence by each other's attacks, David C. Broderick and David S. Terry look
into each other's pistols. They stand face to face in the little valley by Merced Lake. Sturdy
Colton, and warm-hearted Joe McKibbin, second the fearless Broderick. Hayes and the chivalric
Calhoun Benham are the aids of the lion-hearted Terry. It is a meeting of giants. Resolution
against deadly nerve. Brave even to rashness, both of them know it is the first blood of the
fight between South and North. Benham does well as, with theatrical flourish, he casts Terry's
money on the sod. The grass is soon to be stained with the blood of a leader. This is no mere
money quarrel. It is a duel to the death; a calm assertion of the fact that neither in fray,
in the forum, nor on the battle-field, will the North go back one inch. It is high time.

Broderick, the peer of his superb antagonist, knows that the pretext of Terry's challenge is
a mere excuse. It is first blood in the inevitable struggle for the western coast. With no
delay, the stout-hearted champions, friends once, stand as foes in conflict. David Terry's
ball cuts the heart-strings of a man who had been his loving political brother. His personal
friend once and a gallant comrade. Broderick's blood marks the fatal turning-off of the Northern
Democrats from their Southern brothers. As Terry lowers his pistol, looking unpityingly at
the fallen giant, he does not realize he has cut the cords tying the West to the South. It
was a fatal deed, this brother's murder. It was the mistake of a life, hitherto high in purpose.
The implacable Terry would have shuddered could he have looked over the veiled mysteries of
thirty years to come. It was beyond human ken. Even he might have blenched at the strange life-path
fate would lead him over. Over battle-fields where the Southern Cross rises and falls like
Mokanna's banner, back across deserts, to die under the deadly aim of an obscure minion of
the government he sought to pull down. After thirty years, David S. Terry, judge, general,
and champion of the South, was destined to die at the feet of his brother-judge, whose pathway
inclined Northwardly from that ill-starred moment.

Maxime Valois saw in the monster memorial meeting on the plaza, that the cause of the South
was doomed in the West. While Baker's silver voice rises in eulogy over Broderick, the Louisianian
sees a menace in the stern faces of twenty thousand listeners. The shade of the murdered mechanic-senator
hovers at their local feast, a royal Banquo, shadowy father of political kings yet to be.

The clarion press assail the awful deed. Boldly, the opponents of slavery draw out in the community.
There is henceforth no room for treason on the Western coast. Only covert conspiracy can neutralize
the popular wave following Broderick's death. Dissension rages until the fever of the Lincoln
campaign excites the entire community. The pony express flying eastward, the rapidly approaching
telegraph, the southern overland mail with the other line across the plains, bring the news
of Eastern excitement. Election battles, Southern menace, and the tidings of the triumph of
Republican principles, reach the Pacific. Abraham Lincoln is the elected President.

Valois is heavy-hearted when he learns of the victory of freedom at the polls. He would be
glad of some broad question on which to base the coming war. His brow is grave, as he realizes
the South must now bring on at moral disadvantage the conflict. The war will decide the fate
of slavery. Broderick's untimely death and the crushing defeat of the elections are bad omens.
It is with shame he learns of the carefully laid plots to seduce leading officers of the army
and navy. The South must bribe over officials, and locate government property for the use of
the conspirators. It labors with intrigue and darkness, to prepare for what he feels should
be a gallant defiance. It should be only a solemn appeal to the god of battles.

He sadly arranges his personal affairs, to meet the separations of the future. He sits with
his lovely, graceful consort, on the banks of Lagunitas. He is only waiting the throwing-off
of the disguise which hides the pirate gun-ports of the cruiser, Southern Rights. The hour
comes before the roses bloom twice over dead Broderick, on the stately slopes of Lone Mountain.

The rain drips drearily around Judge Hardin's spacious residence in San Francisco. January,
1861, finds the sheltering trees higher. The embowered shade hides to-night an unusual illumination.
Winter breezes sigh through the trees. Showers of spray fall from acacia and vine. As the wet
fog drives past, the ship-lights on the bay are almost hidden. When darkness brings out sweeping
lines of the street-lamps, many carriages roll up to the open doors.

A circle of twenty or thirty intimates gathers in the great dining-room. At the head of the
table, Hardin welcomes the chosen representatives of the great Southern conspiracy in the West.
His residence, rarely thrown open to the public, has grown with the rise of his fortunes. Philip
Hardin must be first in every attribute of a leading judge and publicist. Lights burn late
here since the great election of 1860. Men who are at the helm of finance, politics, and Federal
power are visitors. Editors and trusted Southrons drop in, by twos and threes, secretly. There
is unwonted social activity.

The idle gossips are silent. These visitors are all men, unaccompanied by their families. Woman's
foot never crosses this threshold. In the wings of the mansion, a lovely face is sometimes
seen at a window. It is a reminder of the stories of that concealed beauty who has reigned
years in the mansion on the hill.

Is it a marriage impending? Is it some great scheme? Some new monetary institution to be launched?

These vain queries remain unanswered. There is a mystic password given before joining the feast.
Southerners, tried and true, are the diners. Maxime Valois sits opposite his associate. It
is not only a hospitable welcome the Judge extends, but the mystic embrace of the Knights of
the Golden Circle. In feast and personal enjoyment the moments fly by. The table glitters with
superb plate. It is loaded with richest wines and the dainties of the fruitful West. The board
rings under emphatic blows of men who toast, with emphasis, the "Sunny South." In their flowing
cups, old and new friends are remembered. There is not one glass raised to the honor of the
starry flag which yet streams out boldly at the Golden Gate.

The feast is of conspirators who are sworn to drag that flag at their horses' heels in triumph.
Men nurtured under it.

Judge Hardin gives the signal of departure for the main hall. In an hour or so they are joined
by others who could not attend the feast.

The meeting of the Knights of the Golden Circle proceeds with mystic ceremony. The windows,
doors, and avenues are guarded. In the grounds faithful brothers watch for any sneaking spy.
Every man is heavily armed. It would be short shrift to the foe who stumbles on this meeting
of deadly import.

It is the supreme moment to impart the last orders of the Southern leaders. The Washington
chiefs assign the duties of each, in view of the violent rupture which will follow Lincoln's
inauguration.

Fifty or sixty in number, these brave and desperate souls are ready to cast all in jeopardy.
Life, fortune, and fame. They represent every city and county of California.

Hardin, high priest of this awful propaganda, opens the business of the session with a cool
statement of facts. Every man is now sworn and under obligation to the work. Hardin's eye kindles
as he sees these brothers of the Southern Cross. Each of them has a dozen friends or subordinates
under him. To them these tidings will be only divulged under the awful seal of the death penalty.
There are scores of army and navy officers with high civil officials on the coast whose finely
drawn scruples will keep them out until the first gun is fired, Then these powerful allies,
freed by resignation, can come in. They are holding places of power and immense importance
to the last. The Knights are wealthy, powerful, and desperate.

As Valois hears Hardin's address, he appreciates the labor of years, in weaving the network
which is to hold California, Arizona, and New Mexico for the South. Utah and Nevada are untenanted
deserts. The Mormon regions are neutral and only useful as a geographical barrier to Eastern
forces. Oregon and Washington are to be ignored. There the hardy woodsmen and rugged settlers
represent the ingrained "freedom worship" of the Northwest. They are farmers and lumbermen.
All acknowledge it useless to tempt them out of the fold. Oregon's star gleams now firmly fixed
in the banner of Columbia. And the great Sierras fence them off.

The speaker announces that each member of the present circle will be authorized, on returning,
to organize and extend the circles of the Order. Notification of matters of moment will be
made by qualified members, from circle to circle. Thus, orders will pass quickly over the State.
The momentous secrets cannot be trusted to mail, express, or the local telegraphs.

Hardin calls up member after member, to give their views. The general plan is discussed by
the circle. Keen-eyed secretaries note and arrange opinions and remarks.

Hardin announces that all arrangements are made to use all initiated members going East as
bearers of despatches. They are available for special interviews, with the brothers who are
in every large Northern city and even in the principal centres of Europe.

Ample funds have been forthcoming from the liberal leaders of the local movement. Millions
are already promised by the branches at the East.

Wild cheers hail Judge Hardin's address. He outlines the policy, so artfully laid out, for
the cut-off Western contingent. In foaming wine, the fearless coterie pledges the South till
the rafters ring again. The "Bonnie Blue Flag" rings out, as it does in many Western households,
with "Dixie's" thrilling strains.

The summing up of Hardin is concise: "We are to hold this State until we have orders to open
hostilities. Our numbers must not be reduced by volunteers going East. Our presence will keep
the Yankee troops from going East. We want the gold of the mines here, to sustain our finances.
We have as commanding General, Albert Sidney Johnston, the ideal soldier of America, who will
command the Mississippi. Lee, Beauregard, and Joe Johnston will operate in the East. The fight
will be along the border lines. We will capture Washington, and seize New York and Philadelphia.
A grand Southern army will march from Richmond to Boston. Another from Nashville to Cincinnati
and Chicago. Johnston will hold on here, until forced to resign. Many officers go with him.
We shall know of this, and throw ourselves on the arsenals and forts here, capturing the stores
and batteries. The militia and independent companies will come over to us at once. With Judge
Downey, a Democratic governor, no levies will be called out against us. The navy is all away,
or in our secret control. Once in possession of this State, we will fortify the Sierra Nevada
passes. We are prepared. Congress has given us $600,000 a year to keep up the Southern overland
mail route. It runs through slave-holding territory to Arizona. Every station and relay has
been laid out to suit us. We will have trusty friends and supplies, clear through Arizona and
over the Colorado. At the outbreak, we will seize the whole system. It is the shortest and
safest line."

Hardin, lauding the skilful plans of a complacent Cabinet officer, did not know that the Southern
idea was to connect Memphis direct with Los Angeles.

It was loyal John Butterfield of New York, who artfully bid for a DOUBLE service from Memphis
and St. Louis, uniting at Fort Smith, Arkansas, and virtually defeated this sly move of slavery.

Judge Hardin, pausing in pride, could not foresee that Daniel Butterfield, the gallant son
of a loyal sire, would meet the chivalry of the South as the Marshal of the greatest field
of modern times--awful Gettysburg!

While Hardin plotted in the West, Daniel Butterfield in the East personally laid out every
detail of this great service, so as to checkmate the Southern design, were the Mississippi
given over to loyal control.

The afterwork of Farragut and Porter paralyzed the Southern line of advance; and on the Peninsula,
at Fredericksburg, at Resaca and Chancellorsville, Major-General Daniel Butterfield met in
arms many of the men who listened to Hardin's gibes as to the outwitted Yankee mail contractors.

Hardin, complacent, and with no vision of the awful fields to come, secure in his well-laid
plans, resumes:

"Thus aided through Arizona we will admit a strong column of Texan dragoons. We shall take
Fort Yuma, Fort Mojave, and the forts in Arizona, as well as Forts Union and Craig in New Mexico.
We will then be able to control the northern overland road. We will hold the southern line,
and our forces will patrol Arizona. Mexico will furnish us ports and supplies.

"Should the Northerners attempt to push troops over the plains, we will attack them, in flank,
from New Mexico. We can hold, thus, New Mexico, Arizona, southern Utah, and all of California,
by our short line from El Paso to San Diego. We are covered on one flank by Mexico."

The able brethren are ready with many suggestions. Friendly spies in the Department at Washington
have announced the intended drawing East of the regular garrisons. It is suggested that the
forts, and in fact the whole State, be seized while the troops are in transit.

Another proposes the fitting out of several swift armed steam letters-of-marque from San Francisco,
to capture the enormous Yankee tonnage now between China, Cape Horn, Australia, and California.
The whaling fleet is the object of another. He advises sending a heavily armed revenue cutter,
when seized, to the Behring Sea to destroy the spring whalers arriving from Honolulu too late
for any warning, from home, of the hostilities.

A number of active committees are appointed. One, of veteran rangers, to select frontiersmen
to stir up the Indians to attack the northern overland mail stations. Another, to secretly
confer with the officers of the United States Mint, Custom-House, and Sub-Treasury. Another,
to socially engage the leading officers of the army and navy, and win them over, or develop
their real feelings. Every man of mark in the State is listed and canvassed.

The "high priest" announces that the families of those detailed for distant duty will be cared
for by the general committee. Each member receives the mystic tokens. Orders are issued to
trace up all stocks of arms and ammunition on the coast.

The seizure of the Panama Railroad, thus cutting off quick movement of national troops, is
discussed. Every man is ordered to send in lists of trusty men as soon as mustered into the
new mystery. Convenient movements of brothers from town to town are planned out. Only true
sons of the sunny South are to be trusted.

In free converse, the duty of watching well-known Unionists is enjoined upon all. Name by name,
dangerous men of the North are marked down for proscription or special action. "Removal," perhaps.

With wild cheers, the Knights of the Golden Circle receive the news that the South is surely
going out. The dream long dear to the Southern heart! Any attempt of the senile Buchanan to
reinforce the garrisons of the national forts will be the signal for the opening roar of the
stolen guns. They know that the inauguration of Lincoln on March 4, 1861, means war without
debate. He dare not abandon his trust. He will be welcomed with a shotted salute across the
Potomac.

When the move "en masse" is made, the guests, warmed with wine and full of enthusiasm, file
away. Hardin and Valois sit late. The splashing rain drenches the swaying trees of the Judge's
hillside retreat.

Lists and papers of the principal men on both sides, data and statistics of stock and military
supplies, maps, and papers, are looked at. The deep boom of the Cathedral bell, far below them,
beats midnight as the two friends sit plotting treason.

There is something mystical in the exact hour of midnight. The rich note startles Hardin. Cold,
haughty, crafty, and able, his devotion to the South is that of the highest moral courage.
It is not the exultation which culminates rashly on the battle-field. These lurid scenes are
for younger heroes.

His necessary presence in the West, his age and rank, make him invaluable, out of harness.
His scheming brain is needed, not his ready sword.

He pours out a glass of brandy, saying, "Valois, tell me of our prospects here. You know the
interior as well as any man in the State."

Maxime unburdens his mind. "Judge, I fear we are in danger of losing this coast. I have looked
over the social forces of the State. The miners represent no principle. They will cut no figure
on either side. They would not be amenable to discipline. The Mexicans certainly will not sympathize
with us. We are regarded as the old government party. The Black Republicans are the 'liberals.'
The natives have lost all, under us. We will find them fierce enemies. We cannot undo the treatment
of the Dons." Hardin gravely assents.

"Now, as to the struggle. Our people are enthusiastic and better prepared. The nerve of the
South will carry us to early victory. The North thinks we do not mean fight. Our people may
neglect to rush troops from Texas over through Arizona. We should hold California from the
very first. I know the large cities are against us. The Yankees control the shipping and have
more money than we. We should seize this coast, prey on the Pacific fleets, strike a telling
blow, and with Texan troops (who will be useless there) make sure of the only gold-yielding
regions of America. Texas is safe. We hold the Gulf at New Orleans. Yankee gunboats cannot
reach the shallow Texas harbors. Unless we strike boldly now, the coast is lost forever. If
our people hold the Potomac, the Ohio, and the Missouri (after a season's victories), without
taking Cincinnati and Washington, and securing this coast, we will go down, finally, when the
North wakes up. Its power is immense. If Europe recognizes us we are safe. I fear this may not be."

"And you think the Northerners will fight," says Hardin.

"Judge," replies Valois, "you and I are alone. I tell you frankly we underestimate the Yankees.
From the first, on this coast we have lost sympathy. They come back at us always. Broderick's
death shows us these men have nerve. "Valois continues: "That man is greater dead than alive.
I often think of his last words, 'They have killed me because I was opposed to a corrupt administration
and the extension of slavery.'"

Hardin finishes his glass. "It seems strange that men like Broderick and Terry, who sat on
the bench of the Supreme Court (a senator and a great jurist), should open the game. It was
unlucky. It lost us the Northern Democrats. We would have been better off if Dave Terry had
been killed. He would have been a dead hero. It would have helped us."

Valois shows that, in all the sectional duels and killings on the coast, the South has steadily
lost prestige. The victims were more dangerous dead than alive. Gilbert, Ferguson, Broderick,
and others were costly sacrifices.

Hardin muses: "I think you are right, Maxime, in the main. Our people are in the awkward position
of fighting the Constitution, and the old flag is a dead weight against us. We must take the
initiative in an unnecessary war. This Abe Lincoln is no mere mad fool. I will send a messenger
East, and urge that ten thousand Texan cavalry be pushed right over to Arizona. We must seize
the coast. You are right! There is one obstacle, Valois, I cannot conquer."

"What is that?" says Maxime.

"It is Sidney Johnston's military honor," thoughtfully says Hardin. "He is no man to be played
with. He will not act till he has left the old army regularly. He will wait his commission
from our confederacy. He will then resign and go East."

"It will be too late," cries Valois. "We will be forgotten, and so lose California."

"The worst is that the coast will stand neutral," says Hardin.

"Now, Judge," Valois firmly answers, "I have heard to-night talk of running up the 'bear flag,'
'the lone star,' 'the palmetto banner,' or 'the flag of the California Republic,' on the news
of war. I hope they will not do so rashly."

"Why?" says Hardin.

"I think they will swing under the new flags on the same pole," cries Valois, pacing the room.
"If there is failure here, I shall go East. Judge Valois offers me a Louisiana regiment. If
this war is fought out, I do not propose to live to see the Southern Cross come down."

The Creole pauses before the Judge, who replies, "You must stay here; we must get California
out of the Union."

"If we do not, then the cause lies on Lone Mountain," says Valois, pointing westward toward
the spot where a tall shaft already bears Broderick's name.

Hardin nods assent. It is wise to plant corn after lettuce and radishes are gathered,
and more lettuce, corn, or salad, after the beans are picked.

Then late crops, cabbage, cauliflower or spinach, can go where early corn grew, so that the small
patch may earn your living and pay big dividends.

Do not let two vegetables of the same botanical family follow each other. For instance, lima
beans should not follow green beans or peas, as all the family draw about the same elements
from the soil, and are likely to have the same insects and diseases.

Do not plant cucumbers, squash, or pumpkins too near each other, as
they will often inter-impregnate and produce uneatable hybrids.

Decide what you are going to do with your crop before you plant it, whether to sell it, at
wholesale or at retail, to eat it, or to feed it to stock.

C. E. Hunn, in the Garden Magazine, gives the following arrangement:
"For the beginner who wants to get fresh vegetables and fruits from
May until midwinter, a space 100 X 200 feet is enough.

"1. Plant in rows, not beds, and avoid the backache.

"2. Plant vegetables that mature at the same time near one another.

"3. Plant vegetables of the same height near together--tall ones back.

"4. Run the rows the short way, for convenience in cultivation and because one hundred feet of anything
is enough.

"5. Put the permanent vegetables (asparagus, rhubarb, sweet herbs) at one side, so that the rest
will be easy to plow.

"6. Practice rotation. Do not put vines where they were last. Put corn in a different place.
The other important groups for rotation are root crops (including
potatoes and onions); cabbage tribe, peas and beans, tomatoes, eggplant
and pepper, salad plants.

"7. Don't grow potatoes in a small garden. They aren't worth the bother.

"By training on trellis or wire, the smaller fruit plantings can be
made much closer.

"If fruits are wanted in the garden, plant a row of apple trees along
the northern border, plums and pears on the western sides, cherries
and peaches on the eastern side.

Next the apple trees run a grape trellis; and then in succession east and west, run a row of
blackberries, raspberries, gooseberries, and currants. These rows, with the apple trees, form
a windbreak, and besides adding to the income, protect the vegetables.

Next to the bush fruits, between them and the ends of the vegetable rows, put rhubarb, asparagus, and
strawberries."

Insect pests must be watched for and their destructive work checked. Ashes, slaked lime, or any
kind of dust or powder destroy most insects which prey on the leaves of plants. The reason
for this is that the dust closes the pores through which the insects breathe. It should therefore
be applied when the leaves are dry.

Cutworms can be destroyed by winter plowing. Rotation of vegetables will reduce the damage
from insects, because each family has its peculiar bugs. By constant
change to new soil, the pests have no opportunity to get a foothold.

With bugs, as with boys, only those who are interested in them and
therefore understand them can manage them.

It is fun to study the insects--and it pays.

Here's another use of "land." Maybe a pool in your garden or a dam in a little brook in it may
help out your home garden bank account. Of course a pond a few square yards in extent will give
even better returns if you can sell its produce at retail near by.

W. B. Shaw, a seventy-year-old veteran who lost his right arm during the Civil War, lives in Kenilworth,
D. C., and clears $1500 an acre every year out of mud puddles--if mud puddles can be measured by
the acre.

Mr. Shaw is a pond lily farmer, and despite his lack of his good right
arm, he poles his boat about his mud puddles and gathers in the pond
lilies.

His is not exactly a "dry farm" and neither wet nor cloudy weather bothers him. Furthermore,
the demand for his pond lilies in Baltimore, Washington, Philadelphia, and even New York, and Chicago,
is greater than he can supply.

Mr. Shaw secured this swamp for almost nothing, as it was considered worthless. He divided it into
fifteen pools with little dams between them, and rollers on the dams to enable him to drag
his boat from one to the other. From May to late in September he is busy every morning gathering
lilies. His average is about 500 a morning, which he ships in little galvanized iron tanks with
wet moss.

Many school children know how to get results on a little land. Mr. Mahoney, Superintendent
of the Fairview Garden School, Yonkers, New York, estimates that the total value of produce grown
on the 250 gardens, composing the school plot, in all about one and one quarter acres of land,
was $1308, or at the rate of more than a thousand dollars per acre.

When it is taken into consideration that all the labor was done by boys ranging in age from eight
to twelve years, this result is truly astonishing.

What may not adult skilled labor produce when applied freely to the land.

CHAPTER IX

TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT--SPECIALIZED CROPS

To subdue the land with an ax, a plow and a spade is possible; millions
of acres have been so subdued.

This method, however, is the most expensive of all, as in our times, markets won't wait, and the
man who wants to get on must produce as quickly as possible. To do so, he must have the best
tools. They will pay for themselves many times over in a single year. For the farm, the following
list, in addition to a well-stocked tool chest (hammer, saw, plane, ax, etc.) covers the indispensible:

1
team horses (these may be hired) $200.00 1 walking plow 10.00 1 disk or cutaway harrow 25.00
1 farm wagon 50.00 1 cultivator (two horse) 25.00 1 one-horse cultivator 8.00 Shovels, pick, mattock
or grubbing hoe 10.00 Work harness for two horses 25.00

TOTAL $353.00

These things you must have to get the land in proper shape for seeds or plants; but special crops
require special tools. A scythe is good to keep weeds away from fences. A sickle is handy
to keep down grass. To reduce living expenses, a cow for $60, and fifty hens at fifty cents each,
say $25, will supply a large family with milk and eggs.

Most people make the mistake of buying too many things and these poorly selected. It is better
to have too few tools than too many, for tools are often dropped
where last used, and so are lost.

Then if money is scarce, you may not be able to make a shelter for your machines and tools, and
they will rust through the winter. Many farmers, through neglect, have to replace their tool
equipment every four or five years, but with attention and care, the original equipment, even
to the team, ought still to be in use twenty years after their purchase. I know many instances
where this is true. The above equipment is the minimum for beginning work. The character of
additions to it will depend much upon the crops which you select as the money getters.

For general market gardening and the kitchen garden too, the following
tool list, together with the above, will include everything absolutely
necessary.

Wheel hoe $6.00 Spade and fork, each $1.00 2.00 Push hoe .65 Watering can .60 Rake and common hoe
1.00 Bulb sprayer .25 Trowel .10

TOTAL $10.60

The wheel hoe is a great saver--of backache, especially to the beginner; as Warner says, "at the
best you will conclude that for gardening purposes a cast-iron back with a hinge in it is preferable
to the ones now in use."

The dibble, an old tool handle, or a bit of broomstick sharpened, and garden lines to get the
rows straight, labels, tomato supports, plant protectors and stakes earl all be homemade out of
old material. The full outfit would include the following:

Roller $8.00 Wheel-hoe with seeder 8.50 Sprayer 3.75 Wheelbarrow 4.00 Crowbar 1.50 Weeder .35

For
such crops as admit of horse cultivation a horse hoe will save a great deal of time.

The weeder is a cousin to the push hoe and has a zigzag blade for cutting off young weeds which
are just starting above ground. It is pushed backward and forward and cuts both ways. It is
very good for soft ground; on a harder patch use the push hoe.

A market garden is really a big kitchen garden, from which the cultivator supplies not only his own family,
but his neighbors, the public. To run a successful market garden for profit, land suitably situated
near transportation and markets, a large supply of stable manure, hotbeds for raising plants,
crates for shipping, wagons for delivering, and a complete outfit of tools are necessary.
You must raise all sorts of vegetables and salad plants in quantities sufficiently large to justify
you in giving your whole time to the work. An acre devoted to general market gardening could
be attended to by two men with some extra help for marketing.

To get a place fully established on new, rich land requires two or
three years.

On worn-out land it would take longer to build it up to the high fertility needed for maximum production.
Crops like asparagus and rhubarb take two years to establish on a remunerative basis. If bush
fruits are raised, three years are required to get maximum results.

So in starting, land should be bought outright or leased for ten years.

In market gardening for profit, one acre might be devoted to vegetables, one acre to small
fruits; strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, currants, gooseberries, etc. and one acre kept
for buildings, poultry, etc. An energetic man could clear one thousand
dollars a year besides his living, after he got a start, and be absolutely
independent; that is, unless some predatory railroad corporation could
confiscate his profits before his product reached the market.

Some persons are just naturally so successful with plants that if they stuck an umbrella in the
ground we should expect to see it blossom out into parasols--but they don't know why it does,
and they can't teach any one else how to do it.

Any fool can sneer at "book farming" or at anything else, but you
can hardly succeed without the best books by practical men.

Do not let some experienced ignoramus talk you out of experimenting under their guidance.
You will learn little without experience, and unless you have the
grower's instinct, you will learn less without books.

Don't be hypnotized by long experience or by success. Hardly anybody knows his own business.
You must have noticed that few of the people you buy of or sell to,
know any more of their goods than you do.

It is just the same with trades. Hardly a barber knows that he should not shave you against the grain
of the skin.

Even the cat won't stand being rubbed up the wrong way; but the barber never thought of that.

We
lawyers and the doctors are supposed to be thorough in our own field--I said lately to one of
the ablest men at the New York Bar, "About one lawyer in a hundred knows his business." He said,
"That is a gross overestimate." Shortly after I talked with three Judges, one of the City Court, one
of the Supreme Court, and one of the United States Circuit, and they each agreed that my friend's
remark was about true, and that in most cases litigants would do
as well without lawyers as with them.

If that is true, what chance is there that an uneducated man who has
"raised garden sass ever since he was a boy, and seen his father do
it before him," can teach you correctly?

Men learn very slowly by experience, because no two experiences are
exactly alike, unless they perceive and apply the principles under
the experience.

An intelligent man accustomed to investigation can learn more about a specialty in a week's study
than an untrained practitioner can believe in a year.

What the untrained teacher can tell us is of little account; what he shows us is another matter.

Therefore get help who know that they don't know anything about a garden and who consequently
will do with a will exactly what you tell them to do; such labor is cheap--why should you pay extravagant
prices for skill to a man who has succeeded so poorly that he can
only earn day's wages?

You can get much better knowledge at less cost from a book. Study and put your knowledge into
practice yourself, where you see promise of a profit.

Almost every crop can be made a specialty.

In proportion as special crops are profitable when conditions are right, so are they sources
of loss when things go wrong.

If, after your first season in the country, some special crop takes your fancy, give extra space
and time to it the second year and see if you are successful in handling an eighth or a quarter
acre. If so, you may extend your operations as rapidly as purse and market permit.

Before concentrating upon any crop as the chief source of income, a careful study must be made
of all the conditions surrounding its production; a crop is not produced
in the broad meaning of that term until it is actually in the hands
of the consumer.

Potatoes, for instance, are grown by the hundred acres in sections adapted to their growth,
and special machinery costing hundreds of dollars is used in planting, cultivating, and harvesting
the crop. The good shipping and keeping qualities of the potato enable it to be raised far
from markets and so brings into competition cheap land worked in
large areas, with large capital.

In spite of this, however, the small cultivator can usually make money if he can sell his potatoes
directly to the consumer.

If your land is so situated that you can put your individuality into the crop and can control
all the circumstances, preparation of land, planting, cultivation, harvesting, and marketing,
your chances of success are immeasurably increased. As soon as any important part must be trusted
to some one beyond your control, danger arises. Assiduous care in planting, cultivating, and
packing will avail nothing if the product falls into the hands of transportation companies
or commission merchants indifferent as to what becomes of it.

It is therefore better to be quite independent, sell your own crop, and have the whole operation
in your own hands from the very beginning.

Generally speaking, seed growing for the market is a highly developed
special business which is usually carried on by companies operating
with large capital, able to employ the best experts, and to avail
themselves of all the advantages of scientific methods in culture,
regardless of expense.

So uncertain is the business, that even with all these facilities, they rarely guarantee seeds.
It is obvious that the amateur has little chance of succeeding in
such a difficult business. Nevertheless, he will be able after a few
seasons of increasing experience to gather seeds from selected plants
and so furnish his own supply. It must be borne in mind, however,
that plants can be improved by cross breeding and that by keeping
a variety too long on the same ground its quality deteriorates, and
the plant tends to revert to the type natural to it before domestication.

When
land is cropped every season, the nitrogen, potash, and phosphorus
removed from the soil must be replaced in some form, otherwise you
have diminishing returns, while the expense for labor is the same.
In farming small areas for specialties you cannot easily invoke the
principle of rotation by enriching the land with legumes, to be plowed
under while green, the bacteria on the roots of which gather nitrogen
from the air, but you must get stable manure or buy chemical fertilizers
to maintain the fertility.

Special crops divide themselves naturally
into two classes: those raised for immediate shipment to market, and
those to be hauled to canneries. The first type are generally prepared
in a more expensive way, and need more care and attention. Each class
requires its own special forms of packing to conform to market peculiarities
fixed by the taste of consumers.

For the cultivation of all specialties,
many items of preparation are identical. Land must be well drained,
it must contain a sufficient amount of humus, or decaying vegetable
matter, to make it loose and porous; it must be free from sticks and
stones or any foreign matter likely to impede cultivation or obstruct
growth. The proper formation of a seed bed is a prime prerequisite
to successful cropping. After the land is manured and plowed it should
be gone over in all directions with a disk and smoothing harrow, until
it is of a dustlike fineness.

In thorough cultivation before the
crop is planted, lies the secret of many a success, and in its neglect
the cause of many failures. Intelligent handling of crops is in a
large measure knowledge of the influence of wind and rain, sunshine
and darkness, on the particular nature of the plant Delicate plants,
for example, ought to be grown where buildings or forests break the
force of prevailing winds. Sheltered valleys in irrigated sections
have proved the best for intensive cultivation. For thousands of years
in China and Japan the conditions of successful intensive cultivation
have been well understood, and to-day the most efficient gardeners
are the Chinese. In some parts of Mexico, for the same reasons, intensive
cultivation has reached a high development. In our own West we are
catching up on vegetables and fruits.

CHAPTER X

THE ADVANTAGES FROM
CAPITAL

We have seen what a worker with very little money can do
and how he can succeed. A small capital, however, can be used to increase
the returns to as great advantage on a small farm as large capital
can be used on a large farm and with much less risk.

Stable manure
is still the favorite article with the masses of gardeners. One ton
of ordinary stable manure contains about 1275 pounds of organic matter,
carrying eight pounds of nitrogen, ten pounds of potash, and four
pounds of phosphoric acid.

When thoroughly rotted, the manure acquires
a still larger percentage of plant food; it is more valuable, not
only for that reason, but also on account of its immediate availability.
Further, the mechanical effect of this manure in opening and loosening
the soil, allowing air and warmth to enter more freely, adds greatly
to its value.

It is easily gotten and often goes wholly or in part
to waste. On the outskirts of some towns may be seen a collection
of manure piles that have been hauled out and dumped in waste places.
The plant food in each ton of this manure is worth at least two dollars--that
is the least Eastern farmers pay for similar material, and they make
money doing it. Yet almost every liveryman has to pay some one for
hauling the manure away. This is simply because farmers living near
these towns are missing a chance to secure something for nothing--because,
perhaps, the profit is not directly in sight. But from most soils
there is a handsome profit possible from a very small application
of stable manure.

While writing this, I saw a man in New Rochelle,
N. Y.; dumping a load of street sweepings into a hole in a vacant
lot. It would have been less wasteful to have dumped a bushel of potatoes
into the hole.

Commercial fertilizers are coming more and more in
use by market gardeners, and with reason.

It will be only some secret plot which can now hope to succeed in the West.

Davis and Lee are wedded to Virginia. The haughty selfishness of the "mother of presidents"
demands that every interest of the Confederacy shall give way to morbid State vanity. Virginia
is to be the graveyard of the gallant Southern generation in arms.

Every other pass may be left unguarded. The chivalry of the Stars and Bars must crowd Virginia
till their graves fill the land. Unnecessarily strong, with a frontier defended by rivers,
forests, and chosen positions, it becomes Fortune's sport to huddle the bulk of the Confederate
forces into Lee's army.

It allows the Border, Gulf, and Western States to fall a prey to the North. The story of Lee's
ability has been told by an adoring generation. The record of his cold military selfishness
is shown in the easy conquests of the heart of the South. Their natural defenders were drafted
to fill those superb legions, operating under the eyes of Davis and controlled by the slightest
wish of imperious Lee.

Albert Sidney Johnston, Beauregard, and the fighting tactician, Joe Johnston, were destined
to feel how fatal was the military favoritism of Jefferson Davis. Davis threw away Vicksburg,
and the Mississippi later, to please Lee. All for Virginia.

Stung with letters from Louisiana, reproaching him for inaction while his brethren were meeting
the Northern invaders, Valois decides to go East. He will join the Southern defence. For it
is defence--not invasion--now.

Directing Hardin to select a subordinate in his place, Valois returns to Lagunitas. He must
say farewell to loving wife and prattling child. Too well known to be allowed to follow Showalter,
Terry, and their fellows over the Colorado desert, he must go to Guaymas in Mexico. He can
thus reach the Confederates at El Paso. From thence it is easy to reach New Orleans. Then to
the front. To the field.

Valois feels it would be useless for him to go via Panama. The provost-marshal would hold him
as a "known enemy."

With rage, Valois realizes a new commander makes latent treason uncomfortable in California.
He determines to reach El Paso, and hurl the Texans on California. Should he fail, he heads
a Louisiana regiment. His heart tells him the war will be long and bloody. Edmund Randolph's
loyalty, at the outbreak, prevented the seizure of California. Sibley's folly and Davis's indifference
complete the ruin of the Western plan of action.

"Hardin, hold the Knights together. I will see if I can stop a Yankee bullet!" says Valois.
He notifies Hardin that he intends to make him sole trustee of his property in his absence.

Hardin's term on the bench has expired. Like other Southerners debarred from taking the field,
he gives aid to those who go. The men who go leave hostages behind them. The friendship of
years causes Yalois to make him the adviser of his wife in property matters. He makes him his
own representative. "Thank Heaven!" cries Valois, "my wife's property is safe. No taint from
me can attach to her birthright. It is her own by law."

Valois, at Lagunitas, unfolds to the sorrowing padre his departure for the war. Safe in the
bosom of the priest, this secret is a heavy load. Valois gains his consent to remain in charge
of Lagunitas. The little girl begins to feebly walk. Her infant gaze cannot measure her possessions.

Lovely Dolores Valois listens meekly to her husband's plans. Devoted to Maxime, his will is
her only law. The beautiful dark eyes are tinged with a deeper lustre.

Busied with his affairs, Maxime thinks of the future as he handles his papers. Francois Ribaut
is the depositary of his wishes. Dolores is as incapable as her child in business. Will God
protect these two innocents?

Valois wonders if he will return in defeat like Don Miguel. Poor old Don! around his tomb the
roses creep,--his gentle Juanita by his side.

He hopes the armies of the West will carry the banner, now flying from Gulf to border, into
the North. There the legendary friends of the South will hail it.

Alas! pent up in California, Maxime hears not the murmurs of the Northern pines, breathing
notes of war and defiance. The predictions of the leaders of the conspiracy are fallacious.
Aid and comfort fail them abroad. North of Mason and Dixon's line the sympathizers are frightened.

In his heart he only feels the tumult of the call to the field. It is his pride of race. Tired,
weary of the crosses of fortune, he waits only to see the enemy's fires glittering from hill
and cliff.

With all his successes, the West has never been his home. Looking out on his far-sweeping alamedas,
his thoughts turn fondly back to his native land. He is "going home to Dixie."

The last weeks of Maxime Valois' stay at Lagunitas drift away. Old "Kaintuck" has plead in
vain to go. He yields to Valois' orders not to dream of going with him. His martial heart is
fired, but some one must watch the home. Padre Francois Ribaut has all the documents of the
family, the marriage, and birth of the infant heir. He is custodian also of the will of Donna
Dolores. She leaves her family inheritance to her child, and failing her, to her husband. The
two representatives of the departing master know that Philip Hardin will safely guide the legal
management of the estate while its chieftain is at the wars.

Donna Dolores and the priest accompany Valois to San Francisco. He must leave quietly. He is
liable to arrest. He takes the Mexican steamer, as if for a temporary absence.

It costs Maxime Valois a keen pang of regret, as he rides the last time over his superb domain.
He looks around the plaza, and walks alone through the well-remembered rooms. He takes his
seat, with a sigh, by his wife's side, as the carriage whirls him down the avenues. The orange-trees
are in bloom. The gardens show the rare beauties of midland California. As far as the eye can
reach, the sparkle of lovely Lagunitas mirrors the clouds flaking the sapphire sky. Valois
fixes his eyes once more upon his happy home. Peace, prosperity, progress, mining exploration,
social development, all smile through this great interior valley of the Golden State. No war
cloud has yet rolled past the "Rockies." It is the golden youth of the commonwealth. The throbbing
engine, clattering stamp, whirling saw, and busy factory, show that the homemakers are moving
on apace, with giant strides. No fairer land to leave could tempt a departing warrior. But
even with a loved wife and his only child beside him, the Southerner's heart "turns back to Dixie."

Passing rapidly through Stockton, where his old friends vainly tempt him to say, publicly,
good-by, he refrains. No one must know his destination. No parting cup is drained.

In San Francisco, Philip Hardin, in presence of Valois' wife and the padre, receives his powers
of attorney and final directions. Letters, remittances, and all communications are to be sent
through a house in Havana. The old New Orleans family of Valois is well known there. Maxime
will be able, by blockade-runners and travelling messengers, to obtain his communications.

The only stranger in San Francisco who knows of Maxime's departure is the old mining partner,
Joe Woods. He is now a middle-aged man of property and vigor. He comes from the interior to
say adieu to his friend. "Old times" cloud their eyes. But the parting is secret. Federal spies
throng the streets.

At the mail wharf the Mexican steamer, steam up, is ready for departure. The last private news
from the Texan border tells of General Sibley's gathering forces. Provided with private despatches,
and bundles of contraband letters for the cut-off friends in the South, Maxime Valois repairs
to the steamer. Several returning Texans and recruits for the Confederacy have arrived singly.
They will make an overland party from Guaymas, headed by Valois. Valois, under the orders of
the Golden Circle, has been charged with important communications. Unknown to him, secret agents
of the government watch his departure. He has committed no overt act. He goes to a neutral land.

The calm, passionless face of Padre Francois Ribaut shows a tear trembling in his eye. He leads
the weeping wife ashore from the cabin. The last good-by was sacred by its silent sorrow. Valois'
father's heart was strangely thrilled when he kissed his baby girl farewell, on leaving the
little party. Even rebels have warm hearts.

Philip Hardin's stern features relax into some show of feeling as Valois places his wife's
hands in his. That mute adieu to lovely Dolores moves him. "May God deal with you, Hardin,
as you deal with my wife and child," solemnly says Valois. The lips of Francois Ribaut piously
add "Amen. Amen."

Padre Francisco comes back to the boat. With French impulsiveness, he throws himself in Valois'
arms. He whispers a friend's blessing, a priest's benediction.

The ORIZABA glides out past two or three watchful cruisers flying the Stars and Stripes. The
self-devoted Louisianian loses from sight the little knot of dear ones on the wharf. He sees
the flutter of Dolores' handkerchief for the last time. On to Dixie! Going home!

Out on the bay, thronged with the ships of all nations, the steamer glides. Its shores are
covered with smiling villages. Happy homes and growing cities crown the heights. Past grim
Alcatraz, where the star flag proudly floats on the Sumter-like citadel, the boat slowly moves.
It leaves the great metropolis of the West, spreading over its sandy hills and creeping up
now the far green valleys. It slips safely through the sea-gates of the West, and past the
grim fort at the South Heads. There, casemate and barbette shelter the shotted guns which speak
only for the Union.

Valois' heart rises in his throat as the sentinel's bayonet glitters in the sunlight. Loyal
men are on the walls of the fort. Far away on the Presidio grounds, he can see the blue regiments
of Carleton's troops, at exercise, wheel at drill. The sweeping line of a cavalry battalion
moves, their sabres flash as the lines dash on. These men are now his foes. The tossing breakers
of the bar throw their spray high over bulwarks and guard. In grim determination he watches
the last American flag he ever will see in friendship, till it fades away from sight. He has
now taken the irrevocable step. When he steps on Mexican soil, he will be "a man without a
country." Prudential reasons keep him aloof from his companions until Guaymas is reached. Once
ashore, the comrades openly unite. Without delay the party plunges into the interior. Well
armed, splendidly mounted, they assume a semi-military discipline. The Mexicans are none too
friendly. Valois has abundant gold, as well as forty thousand dollars in drafts on Havana,
the proceeds of Lagunitas' future returns advanced by Hardin.

Twenty days' march up the Yaqui Valley, through Arispe, where the filibusters died with Spartan
bravery, is a weary jaunt. But high hopes buoy them up. Over mesa and gorge, past hacienda
and Indian settlement, they climb passes until the great mountains break away. Crossing the
muddy Rio Grande, Valois is greeted by old friends. He sees the Confederate flag for the first
time, floating over the turbulent levies of Sibley, still at Fort Bliss.

Long and weary marches; dangers from bandit, Indian, and lurking Mexican; regrets for the home
circle at Lagunitas, make Maxime Valois very grave. Individual sacrifices are not appreciated
in war-time. As he rides through the Confederate camp, his heart sinks. The uncouth straggling
plainsmen, without order or regular equipment, recall to him his old enemies, the nomadic Mexican
vaqueros.

There seems to be no supply train, artillery, or regular stores. These are not the men who
can overawe the compact California community. Far gray rocky sandhills stretch along the Texan
border. Over the Rio Grande, rich mountain scenery delights the eye. It instantly recalls to
Valois the old Southern dream of taking the "Zona Libre." Tamaulipas, Coahuila, and Nueva Leon
were coveted as a crowning trophy of the Mexican war. Dreams of olden days.

Received kindly by General Sibley, the Louisianian delivers his letters, despatches, and messages.
After rest and refreshment, he is asked to join a council of war. There are fleet couriers,
lately arrived, who speak of Carleton's column being nearly ready to cross the Colorado. When
the General explains his plan of attacking the Federal forces in New Mexico, and occupying
Arizona, Valois hastens to urge a forced march down to the fertile Gila. He trusts to Canby
timidly holding on to Fort Union and Fort Craig. Alas, Sibley's place of recruiting and assembly
has been ill chosen! The animals, crowded on the bare plains, suffer for lack of forage. Recruits
are discouraged by the dreary surroundings. The effective strength has not visibly increased
in three months. The Texans are wayward. A strong column, well organized, in the rich interior
of Texas, full of the early ardor of secession might have pushed on and reached the Gila. But
here is only a chafing body of undisciplined men. They are united merely by political sentiment.

General Sibley urges Valois to accompany him in his forward march. He offers him a staff position,
promising to release him, then to move to the eastward. Valois' knowledge of the frontier is
invaluable, and he cannot pass an enemy in arms. Maxime Valois, with fiery energy, aids in
urging the motley command forward. On February 7, 1862, the wild brigade of invasion reaches
the mesa near Fort Craig. The "gray" and "blue" meet here in conflict, to decide the fate of
New Mexico and Arizona. Feeble skirmishing begins. On the 2lst of February, the bitter conflict
of Val Verde shows Valois for the first time--alas, not the last!--the blood of brothers mingled
on a doubtful field. It is a horrid fight. A drawn battle.

Instead of pushing on to Arizona, deluded by reports of local aid, Sibley straggles off to
Santa Fe and Albuquerque. Canby refits his broken forces under the walls of strong Fort Union.
Long before the trifling affairs of Glorietta and Peralta, Valois, disgusted with Sibley, is
on his way east. He will join the Army of the West. His heart sickens at the foolish incapacity
of the border commander. The Texan column melts away under Canby's resolute advance. The few
raiders, who have ridden down into Arizona and hoisted the westernmost Confederate flag at
Antelope Peak, are chased back by Carleton's strong column. The boasted "military advance on
California" is at an end. Carleton's California column is well over the Colorado. The barren
fruits of Val Verde are only a few buried guns of McRea's hard-fought battery. The gallantry
of Colonel Thos. P. Ochiltree, C.S.A., at Val Verde, under the modest rank of "Captain," is
the only remembered historic incident of that now forgotten field. The First Regiment and one
battalion of the Second California Volunteer Cavalry, the Fifth California Infantry, and a
good battery hold Arizona firmly. The Second Battalion, Second California Cavalry, the Fifth
California Cavalry, and Third California Infantry, under gallant General Pat Connor, keep Utah
protected. They lash the wild Indians into submission, and prevent any rising.

General Canby and Kit Carson's victorious troops keep New Mexico. They cut the line of any
possible Confederate advance. Only Sibley's pompous report remains now to tell of the fate
of his troops, who literally disbanded or deserted. An inglorious failure attends the dreaded
Texan attack.

The news, travelling east and west, by fugitives, soon announce the failure of this abortive
attempt. The golden opportunity of the fall of 1861 never returns.

The Confederate operations west of the Rio Grande were only a miserable and ridiculous farce.
Valois, leaving failure behind him, learns on nearing the Louisiana line, that the proud Pelican
flag floats no longer over the Crescent City. It lies now helpless under the guns of fearless
Farragut's fleet. So he cannot even revisit the home of his youth. Maxime Valois smuggles himself
across the Mississippi. He joins the Confederates under Van Dorn. He is a soldier at last.

Here in the circling camps of the great Army of the West, Maxime Valois joins the first Louisiana
regiment he meets. He realizes that the beloved Southern Confederacy has yet an unbeaten army.
A grand array. The tramp of solid legions makes him feel a soldier, not a sneaking conspirator.
He is no more a guerilla of the plains, or a fugitive deserter of his adopted State.

The capture of New Orleans seals the Mississippi. The Confederacy is cut in twain. It is positive
now, the only help from the golden West will be the arrival of parties of self-devoted men
like himself. They come in squads, bolting through Mexico or slipping through Arizona. Some
reach Panama and Havana, gaining the South by blockade runners. He opens mail communication
with Judge Hardin, via Havana. He succeeds in exchanging views with the venerable head of his
house at New Orleans. It is all gloomy now. Old and despondent, the New Orleans patriarch has
sent his youthful son away to Paris. Armand is too young to bear arms. He can only come home
and do a soldier's duty later. By family influence, Maxime Valois finds himself soon a major
in a Louisiana regiment. He wears his gray uniform at the head of men already veterans. Shiloh's
disputed laurels are theirs. They are tigers who have tasted blood. In the rapidly changing
scenes of service, trusting to chance for news of his family, Maxime Valois' whole nature is
centred upon the grave duties of his station. Southern victories are hailed from the East.
The victorious arms of the Confederacy roll back McClellan's great force. Bruised, bleeding,
and shattered from the hard-fought fields of the Peninsula, the Unionists recoil. The stars
of the Southern Cross are high in hope's bright field. Though Richmond is saved for the time,
it is at a fearful cost. Malvern Hill shakes to its base under the flaming cannon, ploughing
the ranks of the dauntless Confederates, as the Army of the Potomac hurls back the confident
legions of Lee, Johnston, and Jackson. The Army of the Potomac is decimated. The bloody attrition
of the field begins to wear off these splendid lines which the South can never replace. Losses
like those of Pryor's Brigade, nine hundred out of fifteen hundred in a single campaign, would
appall any but the grim Virginian soldiers. They are veterans now. They learn the art of war
in fields like Seven Pines and Fair Oaks. Even Pryor, as chivalric in action as truculent in
debate, now admits that the Yankees will fight. Fredericksburg's butchery is a victory of note.
All the year the noise of battle rolls, while the Eastern war is undecided, for the second
Manassas and awful Antietam balance each other. Maxime Valois feels the issue is lost. When
the shock of battle has been tried at Corinth, where lion-like Rosecrans conquers, when the
glow of the onset fades away, his heart sinks. He knows that the iron-jointed men of the West
are the peers of any race in the field.

Ay! In the West it is fighting from the first. Donelson, Shiloh, and Corinth lead up to the
awful death shambles of Stone River, Vicksburg, and Chickamauga. These are scenes to shake
the nerve of the very bravest.

Heading his troops on the march, watching the thousand baleful fires of the enemy at night,
when friend and foe go down in the thundering crash of battle, Valois, amazed, asks himself,
"Are these sturdy foes the Northern mudsills?"

