This desolation is produced partly by killing, but chiefly by enslavement of prisoners and
the flight of the conquered. Both constitute compulsory migrations of far-reaching effect in
the fusion of races and the blending of civilizations. The thousands of Greek slaves who were
brought to ancient Rome contributed to its refinement and polish. All the nations of the known
world, from Briton to Syrian and Jew, were represented in the slave markets of the imperial
capital, and contributed their elements to the final composition of the Roman people. When
we read of ninety-seven thousand Hebrews whom Titus sold into bondage after the fall of Jerusalem,
of forty thousand Greeks sold by Lucullus after one victory, and the auction sub corona of
whole tribes in Gaul by Cæsar, the scale of this forcible transfer becomes apparent, and its
power as an agent of race amalgamation. Senator Sam Houston of Texas, speaking of the Comanche
Indians, in the United States Senate, December 31, 1854, said: "There are not less than two
thousand prisoners (whites) in the hands of the Comanches, four hundred in one band in my own
state.... They take no prisoners but women and boys."[157] It was customary among the Indians
to use captured women as concubines and to adopt into the tribe such boys as survived the cruel
treatment to which they were subjected. Since the Comanches in 1847 were variously estimated
to number from nine to twelve thousand,[158] so large a proportion of captives would modify
the native stock.

In Africa slavery has been intimately associated with agriculture as a source of wealth, and
therefore has lent motive to intertribal wars. Captives were enslaved and then gradually absorbed
into the tribe of their masters. Thus war and slavery contributed greatly to that widespread
blending of races which characterizes negro Africa. Slaves became a medium of exchange and
an article of commerce with other continents. The negro slave trade had its chief importance
in the eyes of ethnologists and historians because, in distributing the black races in white
continents, it has given a "negro question" to the United States, superseded the native Indian
stock of the Antilles by negroes, and left a broad negro strain in the blood of Colombia, Venezuela,
and Brazil. This particular historical movement, which during the two centuries of its greatest
activity involved larger numbers than the Tartar invasion of Russia or the Turkish invasion
of Europe, for a long period gave to black Africa the only historical importance which it possessed
for the rest of the world.[159]

[Sidenote: Fusion by deported and military colonies.]

In higher stages of political development, war aiming at the subjugation of large territories
finds another means to fuse the subject peoples and assimilate them to a common standard of
civilization. The purpose is unification and the obliteration of local differences. These are
also the unconscious ends of evolution by historical movement. With this object, conquerors
the world over have used a system of tribal and racial exchanges. It was the policy of the
Incas of ancient Peru to remove conquered tribes to distant parts of the realm, and supply
their places with colonists from other districts who had long been subjected and were more
or less assimilated.[160] In 722 B.C. the Assyrian king, Sargon, overran Samaria, carried away
the Ten Tribes of Israel beyond the Tigris and scattered them among the cities of Media, where
they probably merged with the local population. To the country left vacant by their wholesale
deportation he transplanted people from Babylon and other Mesopotamian cities.[161] The descendants
of these, mingled with the poorer class of Jews still left there, formed the despised Samaritans
of the time of Christ. The Kingdom of Judah later was despoiled by Nebuchadnezzar of much of
its population, which was carried off to Babylon.

This plan of partial deportation and colonization characterized the Roman method of Romanization.
Removal of the conquered from their native environment facilitated the process, while it weakened
the spirit and power of revolt. The Romans met bitter opposition from the mountain tribes when
trying to open up the northern passes of the Apennines. Consequently they removed the Ligurian
tribe of the Apuanians, forty-seven thousand in number, far south to Samnium. When in 15 B.C.
the region of the Rhaetian Alps was joined to the Empire, forty thousand of the inhabitants
were transplanted from the mountains to the plain. The same method was used with the Scordisci
and Dacians of the Danube. More often the mortality of war so thinned the population, that
the settlement of Roman military colonies among them sufficed to keep down revolt and to Romanize
the surviving fragment. The large area of Romance speech found in Roumania and eastern Hungary,
despite the controversy about its origin,[162] seems to have had its chief source in the extensive
Roman colonies planted by the Emperor Trajan in conquered Dacia.[163] In Iberian Spain, which
bitterly resisted Romanization, the process was facilitated by the presence of large garrisons
of soldiers. Between 196 and 169 B.C. the troops amounted to one hundred and fifty thousand,
and many of them remained in the country as colonists.[164] Compare the settlement of Scotch
troops in French Canada by land grants after 1763, resulting in the survival to-day of sandy
hair, blue eyes, and highland names among the French-speaking habitants of Murray Bay and other
districts. The Turks in the fifteenth century brought large bodies of Moslem converts from
Asia Minor to garrison Macedonia and Thessaly, thereby robbing the Anatolian Plateau of half
its original population. Into the vacuum thus formed a current of nomads from inner Asia has
poured ever since.[165]

[Sidenote: Withdrawal and flight.]

Every active historical movement which enters an already populated country gives rise there
to passive movements, either compression of the native folk followed by amalgamation, or displacement
and withdrawal. The latter in some degree attends every territorial encroachment. Only where
there is an abundance of free land can a people retire as a whole before the onslaught, and
maintain their national or racial solidarity. Thus the Slavs seem largely to have withdrawn
before the Germans in the Baltic plains of Europe. The Indians of North and South America retired
westward before the advance of the whites from the Atlantic coast. The Cherokee nation, who
once had a broad belt of country extending from the Tennessee Valley through South Carolina
to the ocean,[166] first retracted their frontier to the Appalachian Mountains; in 1816 they
were confined to an ever shrinking territory on the middle Tennessee and the southern end of
the highlands; in 1818 they began to retire beyond the Mississippi, and in 1828 beyond the
western boundary of Arkansas.[167] The story of the Shawnees and Delawares is a replica of
this.[168] In the same way Hottentots and Kaffirs in South Africa are withdrawing northward
and westward into the desert before the protruding frontier of white settlement, as the Boers
before the English treked farther into the veldt. [See map page 105.]

Where the people attacked or displaced is small or a broken remnant, it often takes refuge
among a neighboring or kindred tribe. The small Siouan tribes of the Carolinas, reduced to
fragments by repeated Iroquois raids, combined with their Siouan kinsmen the Catawbas, who
consequently in 1743 included twenty dialects among their little band.[169] The Iroquoian Tuscaroras
of North Carolina, defeated and weakened by the whites in 1711, fled north to the Iroquois
of New York, where they formed the Sixth Nation of the Confederation. 2. Psalm xxxviii. 3: "Concaluit
cor meum intra me." [1]

Jesus.

1.

Oh, that I could clearly explain to your Lordship the peace and quiet
my soul has found! for it has so great a certainty of the fruition
of God, that it seems to be as if already in possession, [2] though
the joy is withheld. I am as one to whom another has granted by deed
a large revenue, into the enjoyment and use of which he is to come
at a certain time, but until then has nothing but the right already
given him to the revenue. Hence every fugitive
movement tends to assume the character of a dispersal, all the more as organization and leadership
vanish in the catastrophe. The fissile character of primitive societies especially contributes
to this end, so that almost every story of Indian and native African warfare tells of shattered
remnants fleeing in several directions. Among civilized peoples, the dispersal is that of individuals
and has far-reaching historical effects. After the destruction of Jerusalem, the Jews were
scattered over the earth, the debris of a nation. The religious wars of France during the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries caused Huguenots to flee to Switzerland, Germany, Holland, England,
and South Carolina; they even tried to establish a colony on the coast of Brazil. Everywhere
they contributed a valuable element to the economic and social life of the community which
they joined. The great schism in the Russian Church became an agent of emigration and colonization.
It helped to spread the Russian nationality over remote frontier regions of the empire which
previously had been almost exclusively Asiatic; and distributed groups of dissenters in the
neighboring provinces of Turkey, Roumania, Austria, Poland and Prussia.[171]

[Sidenote: Natural regions of retreat.]

The hope of safety from pursuit drives fugitive peoples into isolated and barren places that
are scarcely accessible or habitable, and thereby extends the inhabited area of the earth long
before mere pressure of population would have stretched it to such limits. We find these refugee
folk living in pile villages built over the water, in deserts, in swamps, mangrove thickets,
very high mountains, marshy deltas, and remote or barren islands, all which can be classified
as regions of retreat. Fugitives try to place between themselves and their pursuers a barrier
of sea or desert or mountains, and in doing this have themselves surmounted some of the greatest
obstacles to the spread of the human race.

