Picture: Cover of pamphlet]

              [Picture: Facsimile of last page of pamphlet]

                                    A
                          SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER
                                    TO
                            THE BIBLE IN SPAIN

                              Inspired by
               FORD’S “HAND-BOOK FOR TRAVELLERS IN SPAIN.”

                                    BY
                              GEORGE BORROW

                                 LONDON:
                     PRINTED FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION
                                   1913

PREFATORY NOTE

In 1845 Richard Ford published his Hand-Book for Travellers in Spain and Readers at Home [2
Vols. 8vo.], a work which still commands attention, and the compilation of which is said to
have occupied its author for more than sixteen years.  In conformity with the wish of Ford
(who had himself favourably reviewed The Bible in Spain) Borrow undertook to produce a study
of the Hand-Book for The Quarterly Review.  The following Essay was the result.

But the Essay, brilliant as it is, was not a ‘Review.’  Not until page 6 of the suppressed
edition (p. 25 of the present edition) is reached is the Hand-Book even mentioned, and but
little concerning it appears thereafter.  Lockhart, then editing the Quarterly, proposed to
render it more suitable for the purpose for which it had been intended by himself interpolating
a series of extracts from Ford’s volumes.  But Borrow would tolerate no interference with his
work, and promptly withdrew the Essay, which had meanwhile been set up in type.  The following
letter, addressed by Lockhart to Ford, sufficiently explains the position:

                                                                 London,
                                                      June 13th, 1845.

    Dear Ford,

    ‘El Gitano’ sent me a paper on the “Hand-Book” which I read
    with delight.

    But, behold! he will not allow any tampering . . . I now write
    to condole with you; for I am very sensible, after all, that
    you run a great risk in having your book committed to hands far less
    competent for treating it or any other book of Spanish interest than
    Borrow’s would have been . . . but I consider that, after all,
    in the case of a new author, it is the first duty of “The
    Quarterly Review” to introduce that author fully and fairly to the
    public.

                                                       Ever Yours Truly,
                                                         J. G. Lockhart.

The action of Lockhart in seeking to amend his Essay excited Borrow’s keenest indignation,
and induced him to produce the following amusing squib:—

    Would it not be more dignified
    To run up debts on every side,
    And then to pay your debts refuse,
    Than write for rascally Reviews?
    And lectures give to great and small,
    In pot-house, theatre, and town-hall,
    Wearing your brains by night and day
    To win the means to pay your way?
    I vow by him who reigns in [hell],
    It would be more respectable!

This squib was never printed by Borrow.  I chanced to light upon it recently in a packet of
his as yet unpublished verse.

The Essay itself is far too interesting, and far too characteristic of its author, to be permitted
to remain any longer inaccessible; hence the present reprint.  The original is a folio pamphlet,
extending to twelve numbered pages.  Of this pamphlet no more than two copies would appear
to have been struck off, and both are fortunately extant to-day.  One of these was formerly
in the possession of Dr. William J. Knapp, and is now the property of the Hispanic Society
of New York.  The second example is in my own library.  This was Borrow’s own copy, and is
freely corrected in his handwriting throughout.  From this copy the present edition has been
printed, and in preparing it the whole of the corrections and additions made by Borrow to the
text of the original pamphlet have been adopted.

A reduced facsimile of the last page of the pamphlet serves as frontispiece to the present volume.

                                                                  T. J. W.

A SUPPLEMENTARY CHAPTER TO THE BIBLE IN SPAIN

Does Gibraltar, viewing the horrors which are continually taking place in Spain, and which,
notwithstanding their frequent grotesqueness, have drawn down upon that country the indignation
of the entire civilized world, never congratulate herself on her severance from the peninsula,
for severed she is morally and physically?  Who knows what is passing in the bosom of the old
Rock?  The days of my shame were those when I was clasped in her embraces and was polluted
by her crimes; when I was a forced partaker in her bad faith, soul-subduing tyranny, and degrading
fanaticism; when I heard only her bragging tongue, and was redolent of nought but the breath
of her smoke-loving borrachos; when I was a prison for her convicts and a garrison for her
rabble soldiery—Spain, accursed land, I hate thee: may I, like my African neighbour, become
a house and a retreat only for vile baboons rather than the viler Spaniard.  May I sink beneath
the billows, which is my foretold fate, ere I become again a parcel of Spain—accursed land,
I hate thee, and so long as I can uphold my brow will still look menacingly on Spain.’

Strong language this, it will perhaps be observed—but when the rocks speak strong language
may be expected, and it is no slight matter which will set stones a-speaking.  Surely, if ever
there was a time for Gibraltar to speak, it is the present, and we leave it to our readers
to determine whether the above is not a real voice from Gibraltar heard by ourselves one moonlight
night at Algeziras, as with our hands in our pockets we stood on the pier, staring across the
bay in the direction of the rock.

‘Poor Spain, unfortunate Spain!’ we have frequently heard Spaniards exclaim.  Were it worth
while asking the Spaniard a reason for anything he says or does, we should be tempted to ask
him why he apostrophizes his country in this manner.  If she is wretched and miserable and
bleeding, has she anything but what she richly deserves, and has brought down upon her own
head?  By Spain we of course mean the Spanish nation—for as for the country, it is so much
impassible matter, so much rock and sand, chalk and clay—with which we have for the moment
nothing to do.  It has pleased her to play an arrant jade’s part, the part of a mula falsa,
a vicious mule, and now, and not for the first time, the brute has been chastised—there she
lies on the road amidst the dust, the blood running from her nose.  Did our readers ever peruse
the book of the adventures of the Squire Marcos de Obregon? {13}  No!  How should our readers
have perused the scarce book of the life and adventures of Obregon? never mind! we to whom
it has been given to hear the voice of Gibraltar whilst standing on the pier of Algeziras one
moonlight evening, with our hands in our pockets, jingling the cuartos which they contained,
have read with considerable edification the adventures of the said Marcos, and will tell the
reader a story out of the book of his life.  So it came to pass that in one of his journeys
the Señor de Obregon found himself on the back of a mule, which, to use his own expression,
had the devil in her body, a regular jade, which would neither allow herself to be shod or
saddled without making all the resistance in her power—was in the habit of flinging herself
down whenever she came to a sandy place, and rolling over with her heels in the air.  An old
muleteer, who observed her performing this last prank, took pity on her rider, and said, “Gentleman
student, I wish to give you a piece of advice with respect to that animal”—and then he gave
Marcos the piece of advice, which Marcos received with the respect due to a man of the muleteer’s
experience, and proceeded on his way.  Coming to a sandy place shortly after, he felt that
the mule was, as usual, about to give way to her penchant, whereupon, without saying a word
to any body, he followed the advice of the muleteer and with a halter which he held in his
hand struck with all fury the jade between the two ears.  Down fell the mule in the dust, and,
rolling on her side, turned up the whites of her eyes.  ‘And as I stood by looking at her,’
said Marcos, ‘I was almost sorry that I had struck her so hard, seeing how she turned up the
whites of her eyes.  At length, however, I took a luncheon of bread, and steeping it in wine
from my bota, I thrust it between her jaws, and thus revived her; and I assure you that from
that moment she never played any tricks with me, but behaved both formally and genteelly under
all circumstances, but especially when going over sandy ground.  I am told, however, that as
soon as I parted with her she fell into her old pranks, refusing to be shod or saddled—rushing
up against walls and scarifying the leg of her rider, and flinging herself down in all sandy
places.’  Now we say, without the slightest regard to contradiction, knowing that no one save
a Spaniard will contradict us, that Spain has invariably proved herself just such a jade as
the mule of the cavalier De Obregon: with a kind and merciful rider what will she not do? 
Look at her, how she refuses to be bridled or shod—how she scarifies the poor man’s leg against
rude walls, how ill she behaves in sandy places, and how occasionally diving her head between
her fore-legs and kicking up behind she causes him to perform a somersault in the air to the
no small discomposure of his Spanish gravity; but let her once catch a Tartar who will give
her the garrote right well between the ears, and she can behave as well as any body.  One of
the best of her riders was Charles the First.  How the brute lay floundering in the dust on
the plains of Villalar, turning up the whites of her eyes, the blood streaming thick from her
dishonest nose!  There she lay, the Fleming staring at her, with the garrote in his hand. That’s
right, Fleming! give it her again—and withhold the sopa till the very last extremity.

Then there was Napoleon again, who made her taste the garrote; she was quiet enough under him,
but he soon left her and went to ride other jades, and his place was filled by those who, though
they had no liking for her, had not vigour enough to bring her down on her side.  She is down,
however, at present, if ever she was in her life—blood streaming from her nose amidst the dust,
the whites of her eyes turned up very much, whilst staring at her with uplifted garrote stands
Narvaez.

Yes, there lies Spain, and who can pity her?—she could kick off the kind and generous Espartero,
who, though he had a stout garrote in his hand, and knew what kind of conditioned creature
she was, forbore to strike her, to his own mighty cost and damage.  She kicked off him, and
took up—whom? a regular muleteer, neither more nor less.  We have nothing further to say about
him; he is at present in his proper calling, we bear him no ill-will, and only wish that God
may speed him.  But never shall we forget the behaviour of the jade some two years ago.  O
the yell that she set up, the true mulish yell—knowing all the time that she had nothing to
fear from her rider, knowing that he would not strike her between the ears.  ‘Come here, you
scoundrel, and we will make a bell-clapper of your head, and of your bowels a string to hang
it by’—that was the cry of the Barcelonese, presently echoed in every town and village throughout
Spain—and that cry was raised immediately after he had remitted the mulct which he had imposed
on Barcelona for unprovoked rebellion.  But the mule is quiet enough now; no such yell is heard
now at Barcelona, or in any nook or corner of Spain.  No, no—the Caballero was kicked out of
the saddle, and the muleteer sprang up—There she lies, the brute!  Bien hecho, Narvaez—Don’t
spare the garrote nor the mule!

It is very possible that from certain passages which we have written above, some of our readers
may come to the conclusion that we must be partisans either of Espartero or Narvaez, perhaps
of both.  In such case, however, they would do us wrong.  Having occasion at present to speak
of Spain, we could hardly omit taking some notice of what has been lately going on in the country,
and of the two principal performers in the late funcion.  We have not been inattentive observers
of it; and have, moreover, some knowledge of the country; but any such feeling as partisanship
we disclaim.  Of Narvaez, the muleteer, we repeat that we have nothing more to say, his character
is soon read.  Of the caballero—of Espartero, we take this opportunity of observing that the
opinion which we at first entertained of him, grounded on what we had heard, was anything but
favourable.  We thought him a grasping ambitious man; and, like many others in Spain, merely
wishing for power for the lust thereof; but we were soon undeceived by his conduct when the
reins of government fell into his hand.  That he was ambitious we have no doubt; but his ambition
was of the noble and generous kind; he wished to become the regenerator of his country—to heal
her sores, and at the same time to reclaim her vices—to make her really strong and powerful—and,
above all, independent of France.  But all his efforts were foiled by the wilfulness of the
animal—she observed his gentleness, which she mistook for fear, a common mistake with jades—gave
a kick, and good bye to Espartero!  There is, however, one blot in Espartero’s career; we allude
to it with pain, for in every other point we believe him to have been a noble and generous
character; but his treatment of Cordova cannot be commended on any principle of honour or rectitude.
Cordova was his friend and benefactor, to whom he was mainly indebted for his advancement in
the army.  Espartero was a brave soldier, with some talent for military matters.  But when
did either bravery or talent serve as credentials for advancement in the Spanish service? 
He would have remained at the present day a major or a colonel but for the friendship of Cordova,
who, amongst other things, was a courtier, and who was raised to the command of the armies
of Spain by a court intrigue—which command he resigned into the hands of Espartero when the
revolution of the Granja and the downfall of his friends, the Moderados, compelled him to take
refuge in France.  The friendship of Cordova and Espartero had been so well known that for
a long time it was considered that the latter was merely holding the command till his friend
might deem it safe and prudent to return and resume it.  Espartero, however, had conceived
widely different views.  After the return of Cordova to Spain he caused him to be exiled under
some pretence or other.  He doubtless feared him, and perhaps with reason; but the man had
been his friend and benefactor, and to the relations which had once existed between them Cordova
himself alludes in a manifesto which he printed at Badajoz when on his way to Portugal, and
which contains passages of considerable pathos.  Is there not something like retribution in
the fact that Espartero is now himself in exile?

Cordova!  His name is at present all but forgotten, yet it was at one time in the power of
that man to have made himself master of the destinies of Spain.  He was at the head of the
army—was the favourite of Christina—and was, moreover, in the closest connexion with the Moderado
party—the most unscrupulous, crafty, and formidable of all the factions which in these latter
times have appeared in the bloody circus of Spain. But if ever there was a man, a real man
of flesh and blood, who in every tittle answered to one of the best of the many well-drawn
characters in Le Sage’s wonderful novel—one of the masters of Gil Blas, a certain Don Mathias,
who got up at midday, and rasped tobacco whilst lolling on the sofa, till the time arrived
for dressing and strolling forth to the prado—a thorough Spanish coxcomb highly perfumed, who
wrote love-letters to himself bearing the names of noble ladies—brave withal and ever ready
to vindicate his honour at the sword’s point, provided he was not called out too early of a
morning—it was this self-same Don Cordova, who we repeat had the destinies of Spain at one
time in his power, and who, had he managed his cards well, and death had not intervened, might
at the present moment have occupied the self-same position which Narvaez fills with so much
credit to himself.  The man had lots of courage, was well versed in the art military; and once,
to his honour be it said, whilst commanding a division of the Christine army, defeated Zumalacarregui
in his own defiles; but, like Don Mathias, he was fond of champagne suppers with actresses,
and would always postpone a battle for a ball or a horse-race.  About five years ago we were
lying off Lisbon in a steamer in our way from Spain.  The morning was fine, and we were upon
deck staring vacantly about us, as is our custom, with our hands in our pockets, when a large
barge with an awning, and manned by many rowers, came dashing through the water and touched
the vessel’s side.  Some people came on board, of whom, however, we took but little notice,
continuing with our hands in our pockets staring sometimes at the river, and sometimes at the
castle of Saint George, the most remarkable object connected with the ‘white city,’ which strikes
the eye from the Tagus. In a minute or two the steward came running up to us from the cabin,
and said, ‘There are two or three strange people below who seem to want something; but what
it is we can’t make out, for we don’t understand them.  Now I heard you talking ‘Moors’ the
other day to the black cook, so pray have the kindness to come and say two or three words in
Moors to the people below.’  Whereupon, without any hesitation, we followed the steward into
the cabin.  ‘Here’s one who can jabber Moors with you,’ bawled he, bustling up to the new comers.
On observing the strangers, however, who sat on one of the sofas, instead of addressing them
in ‘Moors,’ we took our hands out of our pockets, drew ourselves up, and making a most ceremonious
bow, exclaimed in pure and sonorous Castilian, ‘Cavaliers, at your feet!  What may it please
you to command?’

The strangers, who had looked somewhat blank at the first appearance of our figure, no sooner
heard us address them in this manner than they uttered a simultaneous ‘Ola!’ and, springing
up, advanced towards us with countenances irradiated with smiles.  They were three in number,
to say nothing of a tall loutish fellow with something of the look of a domestic, who stood
at some distance. Now, the Capulets were very zealous, and at this time a famous itinerant preacher
came into their neighborhood. They, being the greatest people in the place, invited him to stay at
their house during his visit. He often preached in the open air. One day, at the end of one
of those eloquent discourses, a young man in countryman's dress came up and asked him to marry
himself and a young woman whom he had been waiting upon a long time, but who had refused to
be married unless this very preacher could perform the ceremony. 'She said it would be a blessed wedlock
of your joining,' pursued the young fellow. The preacher, although he was a great man, was only
human,--it is well, I suppose, that we never outgrow our humanity,--and felt flattered by
the young girl's belief in his sanctity. He proposed the next day for the ceremony, and was
arranging to marry the rustic couple on the lawn before the house of his host when the young man
interrupted him by stating that it must be gone through with immediately, for his lady-love was so shy
that it was with difficulty she had been persuaded to come to-night, and she would never consent
if he gave her all that time to think the matter over in, nor would she be willing to come up on
the lawn with the great people. She was at hand with one of her friends; everything was prepared;
would he marry them then? At that moment? The bewildered minister looked up the road before
him, where the carriage of the Capulets was disappearing at the top of the hill; he had been
told that the daughter would remain with him, and that the carriage would return as soon as Mamma
Capulet had made inquiries about a cottager who was ill; for his congregation had been crowding
about him with questions and tearful confessions of sins, and the good Capulets, who had the
opportunity to make their confessions in private, were in haste to be gone. Where was his fair
companion? He looked about him; he had lost sight of her in the throng. But in a few moments
she came forward, accompanying the bride, who the groom explained was a protégée of hers. Miss
Capulet had drawn down her veil, and in answer to this statement nodded to the reverend gentleman
and murmured an assent. The bride's face, too, was hidden by her bonnet and by her shyness, which
prevented her from once looking up. The name of the groom lingered with surprise on the minister's
lips, for it was not a clodhopper's name, I assure you; but he had heard nothing of the love
affair.
  The boat had by this time nearly reached the Caesodrea, though, had it reached Cintra—but
stay, Cintra is six leagues from Lisbon—and, moreover, no boat unless carried can reach Cintra.
Twice did we lift up our voice.  At the second shout the boat rested on its oars; and when
we added ‘Caballeros, vengan ustedes atras,’ its head was turned round in a jiffy, and back
it came bounding over the waters with twice its former rapidity.  We are again in the cabin;
the three Spaniards, the domestic, ourselves, and the steward; the latter stands with his back
against the door, for the purpose of keeping out intruders.  There is a small chest on the
table, on which all eyes are fixed; and now, at a sign from Cordova, the domestic advances,
in his hand a chisel, which he inserts beneath the lid of the chest, exerting all the strength
of his wrist—the lid flies open, and discloses some hundreds of genuine Havannah cigars.  ‘What
obligations am I not under to you!’ said Cordova, again taking us by the hand, ‘the very sight
of them gives me new life; long have I been expecting them.  A trusty friend at Gibraltar promised
to send them, but they have tarried many weeks: but now to dispose of this treasure.’  In a
moment he and his friends were busily employed in filling their pockets.  Yes Cordova, the
renowned general, and the two secretaries of a certain legation at Lisbon—for such were his
two friends—are stowing away the Havannah cigars with all the eagerness of contrabandistas.
‘Rascal,’ said Cordova, suddenly turning to his domestic with a furious air and regular Spanish
grimace, ‘you are doing nothing; why don’t you take more?’  ‘I can’t hold any more, your worship,’
replied the latter in a piteous tone.  ‘My pockets are already full; and see how full I am
here,’ he continued, pointing to his bosom. ‘Peace, bribon,’ said his master; ‘if your bosom
is full, fill your hat, and put it on your head.  We owe you more than we can express,’ said
he, turning round and addressing us in the blandest tones.  ‘But why all this mystery?’ we
demanded.  ‘O, tobacco is a royal monopoly here, you know, so we are obliged to be cautious.’
‘But you came in the custom-house barge?’  ‘Yes, the superintendent of the customs lent it
to us in order that we might be put to as little inconvenience as possible.  Between ourselves,
he knows all about it; he is only solicitous to avoid any scandal.  Really these Portuguese
have some slight tincture of gentility in them, though they are neither Castilian nor English,’
he continued, making us another low bow.  On taking his departure the general gave the steward
an ounce of gold, and having embraced us and kissed us on the cheek, said, ‘In a few weeks
I shall be in England, pray come and see me there.’  This we promised faithfully to do, but
never had the opportunity; he went on shore with his cigars, gave a champagne supper to his
friends, and the next morning was a corpse.  What a puff of smoke is the breath of man!

But here before us is a Hand-book for Spain.  From what we have written above it will have
been seen that we are not altogether unacquainted with the country; indeed we plead guilty
to having performed the grand tour of Spain more than once; but why do we say guilty—it is
scarcely a thing to be ashamed of; the country is a magnificent one, and the people are a highly
curious people, and we are by no means sorry that we have made the acquaintance of either.
Detestation of the public policy of Spain, and a hearty abhorrence of its state creed, we consider
by no means incompatible with a warm admiration for the natural beauties of the country, and
even a zest for Spanish life and manners.  We love a ride in Spain, and the company to be found
in a Spanish venta; but the Lord preserve us from the politics of Spain, and from having anything
to do with the Spaniards in any graver matters than interchanging cigars and compliments, meetings
upon the road (peaceable ones of course), kissing and embracing (see above).  Whosoever wishes
to enjoy Spain or the Spaniards, let him go as a private individual, the humbler in appearance
the better: let him call every beggar Cavalier, every Don a Señor Conde; praise the water of
the place in which he happens to be as the best of all water; and wherever he goes he will
meet with attention and sympathy. ‘The strange Cavalier is evidently the child of honourable
fathers, although, poor man, he appears to be, like myself, unfortunate’—will be the ejaculation
of many a proud tatterdemalion who has been refused charity with formal politeness—whereas
should the stranger chuck him contemptuously an ounce of gold, he may be pretty sure that he
has bought his undying hatred both in this world and the next.

Here we have a Hand-book for Spain—we mean for travellers in Spain—and of course for English
travellers.  The various hand-books which our friend Mr. Murray has published at different
times are very well known, and their merit generally recognized.  We cannot say that we have
made use of any of them ourselves, yet in the course of our peregrinations we have frequently
heard travellers speak in terms of high encomium of their general truth and exactness, and
of the immense mass of information which they contain.  There is one class of people, however,
who are by no means disposed to look upon these publications with a favourable eye—we mean
certain gentry generally known by the name of valets de place, for whom we confess we entertain
no particular affection, believing them upon the whole to be about the most worthless, heartless,
and greedy set of miscreants to be found upon the whole wide continent of Europe.  These gentry,
we have reason to know, look with a by no means favourable eye upon these far-famed publications
of Albemarle-street.  ‘They steal away our honest bread,’ said one of them to us the other
day at Venice, ‘I Signori forestieri find no farther necessity for us since they have appeared;
we are thinking of petitioning the government in order that they may be prohibited as heretical
and republican.  Were it not for these accursed books I should now have the advantage of waiting
upon those forestieri’—and he pointed to a fat English squire, who with a blooming daughter
under each arm, was proceeding across the piazza to St. Marco with no other guide than a ‘Murray,’
which he held in his hand. High, however, as was the opinion which we had formed of these Hand-books
from what we had heard concerning them, we were utterly unprepared for such a treat as has
been afforded us by the perusal of the one which now lies before us—the Hand-book for Spain.

It is evidently the production of a highly-gifted and accomplished man of infinite cleverness,
considerable learning, and who is moreover thoroughly acquainted with the subject of which
he treats.  That he knows Spain as completely as he knows the lines upon the palm of his hand,
is a fact which cannot fail of forcing itself upon the conviction of any person who shall merely
glance over the pages; yet this is a book not to be glanced over, for we defy any one to take
it up without being seized with an irresistible inclination to peruse it from the beginning
to the end—so flowing and captivating is the style, and so singular and various are the objects
and events here treated of.  We have here a perfect panorama of Spain, to accomplish which
we believe to have been the aim and intention of the author; and gigantic as the conception
was, it is but doing him justice to say that in our opinion he has fully worked it out.  But
what iron application was required for the task—what years of enormous labour must have been
spent in carrying it into effect even after the necessary materials had been collected—and
then the collecting of the materials themselves—what strange ideas of difficulty and danger
arise in our minds at the sole mention of that most important point!  But here is the work
before us; the splendid result of the toil, travel, genius, and learning of one man, and that
man an Englishman.  The above is no overstrained panegyric; we refer our readers to the work
itself, and then fearlessly abandon the matter to their decision.  We have here all Spain before
us; mountain, plain, and river, poblado y desploblado—the well known and the mysterious—Barcelona
and Batuecas.

Amidst all the delight and wonder which we have felt, we confess that we have been troubled
by an impertinent thought of which we could not divest ourselves.  We could not help thinking
that the author, generous enough as he has been to the public, has been rather unjust to himself—by
publishing the result of his labours under the present title.  A Hand-book is a Hand-book after
all, a very useful thing, but still—The fact is that we live in an age of humbug, in which
every thing to obtain much note and reputation must depend less upon its own intrinsic merits
than on the name it bears.  The present work is about one of the best books ever written upon
Spain; but we are afraid that it will never be estimated at its proper value; for after all
a Hand-book is a Hand-book. Permit us, your Ladyship, to introduce to you the learned, talented,
and imaginative author of the—shocking!  Her Ladyship would faint, and would never again admit
ourselves and our friends to her soirées.  What a pity that this delightful book does not bear
a more romantic sounding title—’Wanderings in Spain,’ for example; or yet better, ‘The Wonders
of the Peninsula.’

But are we not ourselves doing our author injustice?  Aye surely; the man who could write a
book of the character of the one which we have at present under notice, is above all such paltry
considerations, so we may keep our pity for ourselves.  If it please him to cast his book upon
the waters in the present shape, what have we to do but to be grateful?—we forgot for a moment
with what description of man we have to do.  This is no vain empty coxcomb; he cannot but be
aware that he has accomplished a great task; but such paltry considerations as those to which
we have alluded above are not for him but for writers of a widely different stamp with whom
we have nothing to do.

WHAT TO OBSERVE IN SPAIN.

Before we proceed to point out the objects best worth seeing in the Peninsula, many of which
are to be seen there only, it may be as well to mention what is not to be seen: there is no
such loss of time as finding this out oneself, after weary chace and wasted hour.  Those who
expect to find well-garnished arsenals, libraries, restaurants, charitable or literary institutions,
canals, railroads, tunnels, suspension-bridges, steam-engines, omnibuses, manufactories, polytechnic
galleries, pale-ale breweries, and similar appliances and appurtenances of a high state of
political, social, and commercial civilisation, had better stay at home.  In Spain there are
no turnpike-trust meetings, no quarter-sessions, no courts of justice, according to the real
meaning of that word, no treadmills, no boards of guardians, no chairmen, directors, masters-extraordinary
of the court of chancery, no assistant poor-law commissioners.  There are no anti-tobacco-teetotal-temperance
meetings, no auxiliary missionary propagating societies, nothing in the blanket and lying-in
asylum line, nothing, in short, worth a revising barrister of three years’ standing’s notice.
Spain is no country for the political economist, beyond affording an example of the decline
of the wealth of nations, and offering a wide topic on errors to be avoided, as well as for
experimental theories, plans of reform and amelioration.  In Spain, Nature reigns; she has
there lavished her utmost prodigality of soil and climate which a bad government has for the
last three centuries been endeavouring to counteract.  Spain is a terra incognita to naturalists,
geologists, and every branch of ists and ologists.  The material is as superabundant as native
labourers and operatives are deficient.  All these interesting branches of inquiry, healthful
and agreeable, as being out-of-door pursuits, and bringing the amateur in close contact with
nature, offer to embryo authors, who are ambitious to book something new, a more worthy subject
than the decies repetita descriptions of bull-fights and the natural history of ollas and ventas.
Those who aspire to the romantic, the poetical, the sentimental, the artistical, the antiquarian,
the classical, in short, to any of the sublime and beautiful lines, will find both in the past
and present state of Spain subjects enough, in wandering with lead-pencil and note-book through
this singular country, which hovers between Europe and Africa, between civilisation and barbarism;
this is the land of the green valley and barren mountain, of the boundless plain and the broken
sierra, now of Elysian gardens of the vine, the olive, the orange, and the aloe, then of trackless,
vast, silent, uncultivated wastes, the heritage of the wild bee.  Here we fly from the dull
uniformity, the polished monotony of Europe, to the racy freshness of an original, unchanged
country, where antiquity treads on the heels of to-day, where Paganism disputes the very altar
with Christianity, where indulgence and luxury contend with privation and poverty, where a
want of all that is generous or merciful is blended with the most devoted heroic virtues, where
the most cold-blooded cruelty is linked with the fiery passions of Africa, where ignorance
and erudition stand in violent and striking contrast.

Here let the antiquarian pore over the stirring memorials of many thousand years, the vestiges
of Phœnician enterprise, of Roman magnificence, of Moorish elegance, in that storehouse of
ancient customs, that repository of all elsewhere long forgotten and passed by; here let him
gaze upon those classical monuments, unequalled almost in Greece or Italy, and on those fairy
Aladdin palaces, the creatures of Oriental gorgeousness and imagination, with which Spain alone
can enchant the dull European; here let the man of feeling dwell on the poetry of her envy-disarming
decay, fallen from her high estate, the dignity of a dethroned monarch, borne with unrepining
self-respect, the last consolation of the innately noble, which no adversity can take away;
here let the lover of art feed his eyes with the mighty masterpieces of Italian art, when Raphael
and Titian strove to decorate the palaces of Charles, the great emperor of the age of Leo X.,
or with the living nature of Velazquez and Murillo, whose paintings are truly to be seen in
Spain alone; here let the artist sketch the lowly mosque of the Moor, the lofty cathedral of
the Christian, in which God is worshipped in a manner as nearly befitting His glory as the
power and wealth of finite man can reach; art and nature here offer subjects, from the feudal
castle, the vasty Escorial, the rock-built alcazar of imperial Toledo, the sunny towers of
stately Seville, to the eternal snows and lovely vega of Granada: let the geologist clamber
over mountains of marble, and metal-pregnant sierras, let the botanist cull from the wild hothouse
of nature plants unknown, unnumbered, matchless in colour, and breathing the aroma of the sweet
south; let all, learned or unlearned, listen to the song, the guitar, the Castanet; let all
mingle with the gay, good-humoured, temperate peasantry, the finest in the world, free, manly,
and independent, yet courteous and respectful; let all live with the noble, dignified, high-bred,
self-respecting Spaniard; let all share in their easy, courteous society; let all admire their
dark-eyed women, so frank and natural, to whom the voice of all ages and nations has conceded
the palm of attraction, to whom Venus has bequeathed her magic girdle of grace and fascination;
let all—sed ohe! jam satis—enough for starting on this expedition, where, as Don Quixote said,
there are opportunities for what are called adventures elbow deep.

The following account of the rivers of Spain would do credit to the pen of Robertson:—

    ‘There are six great rivers in Spain,—the arteries which run between
    the seven mountain chains, the vertebras of the geological skeleton.
    These six watersheds are each intersected in their extent by others
    on a minor scale, by valleys and indentations, in each of which runs
    its own stream.  Thus the rains and melted snows are all collected in
    an infinity of ramifications, and carried by these tributary conduits
    into one of the six main trunks, or great rivers: all these, with the
    exception of the Ebro, empty themselves into the Atlantic.  The Duero
    and Tagus, unfortunately for Spain, disembogue in Portugal, thus
    becoming a portion of a foreign dominion exactly where their
    commercial importance is the greatest.  Philip II. saw the true value
    of the possession of Portugal, which rounded and consolidated Spain,
    and insured to her the possession of these valuable outlets of
    internal produce, and inlets for external commerce.  Portugal annexed
    to Spain gave more real power to his throne than the dominion of
    entire continents across the Atlantic.  The Miño, which is the
    shortest of these rivers, runs through a bosom of fertility.  The
    Tajo, Tagus, which the fancy of poets has sanded with gold and
    embanked with roses, tracks much of its dreary way through rocks and
    comparative barrenness.  The Guadiana creeps through lonely
    Estremadura, infecting the low plains with miasma.  The
    Guadalquivir eats out its deep banks amid the sunny olive-clad
    regions of Andalucia, as the Ebro divides the levels of Arragon.
    Spain abounds with brackish streams, Salados, and with salt-mines,
    or saline deposits, after the evaporation of the sea-waters.  The
    central soil is strongly impregnated with saltpetre: always arid, it
    every day is becoming more so, from the singular antipathy which the
    inhabitants of the interior have against trees.  There is nothing to
    check the power of evaporation, no shelter to protect or preserve
    moisture.  The soil becomes more and more baked and calcined; in some
    parts it has almost ceased to be available for cultivation: another
    serious evil, which arises from want of plantations, is, that the
    slopes of hills are everywhere liable to constant denudation of soil
    after heavy rain.  There is nothing to break the descent of the
    water; hence the naked, barren stone summits of many of the sierras,
    which have been pared and peeled of every particle capable of
    nourishing vegetation; they are skeletons where life is extinct.  Not
    only is the soil thus lost, but the detritus washed down either forms
    bars at the mouths of rivers, or chokes up and raises their beds;
    they are thus rendered liable to overflow their banks, and convert
    the adjoining plains into pestilential swamps.  The supply of water,
    which is afforded by periodical rains, and which ought to support the
    reservoirs of rivers, is carried off at once in violent floods,
    rather than in a gentle gradual disembocation.  The volume in the
    principal rivers of Spain has diminished, and is diminishing.  Rivers
    which were navigable are so no longer; the artificial canals which
    were to have been substituted remain unfinished: the progress of
    deterioration advances, while little is done to counteract or amend
    what every year must render more difficult and expensive, while the
    means of repair and correction will diminish in equal proportion,
    from the poverty occasioned by the evil, and by the fearful extent
    which it will be allowed to attain.  The rivers which are really
    adapted to navigation are, however, only those which are perpetually
    fed by those tributary streams that flow down from mountains which
    are covered with snow all the year, and these are not many.  The
    majority of Spanish rivers are very scanty of water during the summer
    time, and very rapid in their flow when filled by rains or melting
    snow: during these periods they are impracticable for boats.  They
    are, moreover, much exhausted by being drained off, bled, for the
    purposes of artificial irrigation.  The scarcity of rain in the
    central table-lands is much against a regular supply of water to the
    springs of the rivers: the water is soon sucked up by a parched,
    dusty, and thirsty soil, or evaporated by the dryness of the
    atmosphere.  Many of the sierras are indeed covered with snow, but
    to no great depth, and the coating soon melts under the summer suns,
    and passes rapidly away.’

Here we have a sunny little sketch of a certain locality at Seville; it is too life-like not
to have been taken on the spot:—

    ‘The sunny flats under the old Moorish walls, which extend between
    the gates of Carmona and La Carne, are the haunts of idlers and
    of gamesters.  The lower classes of Spaniards are constantly gambling
    at cards: groups are to be seen playing all day long for wine, love,
    or coppers, in the sun, or under their vine-trellises.  There is
    generally some well-known cock of the walk, a bully, or guapo, who
    will come up and lay his hands on the cards, and say, ‘No one shall
    play here but with mine’—aquí no se juega sino con mis barajas.  If
    the gamblers are cowed, they give him dos cuartos, a halfpenny
    each.  If, however, one of the challenged be a spirited fellow, he
    defies him.  Aquí no se cobra el barato sino con un punal de
    Albacete—‘You get no change here except out of an Albacete knife.’
    If the defiance be accepted, vamos alla is the answer—‘Let’s go to
    it.’  There’s an end then of the cards, all flock to the more
    interesting écarté; instances have occurred, where Greek meets
    Greek, of their tying the two advanced feet together, and yet
    remaining fencing with knife and cloak for a quarter of an hour
    before the blow be dealt.  The knife is held firmly, the thumb is
    pressed straight on the blade, and calculated either for the cut or
    thrust, to chip bread and kill men.’

Apropos of Seville.  It is sometimes called we believe La Capital de Majeza; the proper translation
of which we conceive to be the Head Quarters of Foolery, for nothing more absurd and contemptible
than this Majeza ever came within the sphere of our contemplation.  Nevertheless it constitutes
the chief glory of the Sevillians.  Every Sevillian, male or female, rich or poor, handsome
or ugly, aspires at a certain period of life to the character of the majo or maja.  We are
not going to waste either space or time by entering into any lengthened detail of this ridiculous
nonsense: indeed, it is quite unnecessary; almost every one of the books published on Spain,
and their name at present is legion, being crammed with details of this same Majeza—a happy
combination of insolence, ignorance, frippery, and folly.  The majo or Tomfool struts about
the streets dressed something like a merry Andrew with jerkin and tight hose, a faja or girdle
of crimson silk round his waist, in which is sometimes stuck a dagger, his neck exposed, and
a queer kind of half-peaked hat on his head.  He smokes continually, thinks there is no place
like Seville, and that he is the prettiest fellow in Seville.  His favourite word is ‘Carajo!’
The maja or she-simpleton, wears a fan and mantilla, exhibits a swimming and affected gait,
thinks that there’s no place like Seville, that she is the flower of Seville—Carai! is her
favourite exclamation.  But enough of these poor ridiculous creatures. Yet, ridiculous in every
respect as they are, these majos and majas find imitators and admirers in people who might
be expected to look down with contempt upon them and their follies; we have seen, and we tell
it with shame, we have seen Englishmen dressed in Tomfool’s livery lounging about Seville breathing
out smoke and affecting the airs of hijos de Sevilla; and what was yet worse, fair blooming
Englishwomen, forgetful of their rank as daughters of England, appearing à la maja on the banks
of the Guadalquivir, with fan and mantilla, carai and caramba.  We wish sincerely that our
countrymen and women whilst travelling abroad would always bear in mind that they can only
be respected or respectable so long as they maintain their proper character—that of Englishmen
and Englishwomen;—but in attempting to appear French, Italians, and Spaniards, they only make
themselves supremely ridiculous.  As the tree falls, so must it lie.  They are children of
England; they cannot alter that fact, therefore let them make the most of it, and after all
it is no bad thing to be a child of England.  But what a poor feeble mind must be his who would
deny his country under any circumstances!  Therefore, gentle English travellers, when you go
to Seville, amongst other places, appear there as English, though not obtrusively, and do not
disgrace your country by imitating the airs and graces of creatures whom the other Spaniards,
namely, Castilians, Manchegans, Aragonese, &c., pronounce to be fools.

THE NORMANS IN SPAIN.

    ‘In the ninth century, the Normans or Northmen made piratical
    excursions on the W. coast of Spain.  They passed, in 843, from
    Lisbon up to the straits and everywhere, as in France, overcame the
    unprepared natives, plundering, burning, and destroying.  They
    captured even Seville itself, September 30, 844, but were met by the
    Cordovese Kalif, beaten, and expelled.  They were called by the Moors
    Majus, Madjous, Magioges (Conde, i. 282), and by the early
    Spanish annalists Almajuzes.  The root has been erroneously derived
    from Μιyος, Magus, magicians or supernatural beings, as they were
    almost held to be.  The term Madjous was, strictly speaking,
    applied by the Moors to those Berbers and Africans who were Pagans or
    Muwallads, i.e. not believers in the Khoran.  The true etymology is
    that of the Gog and Magog so frequently mentioned by Ezekiel
    (xxxviii. and xxxix.) and in the Revelations (xx. 8) as ravagers of
    the earth and nations, May-Gogg, “he that dissolveth,”—the fierce
    Normans appeared, coming no one knew from whence, just when the minds
    of men were trembling at the approach of the millennium, and thus
    were held to be the forerunners of the destroyers of the world.  This
    name of indefinite gigantic power survived in the Mogigangas, or
    terrific images, which the Spaniards used to parade in their
    religious festivals, like the Gogs and Magogs of our civic wise men
    of the East.  Thus Andalucia being the half-way point between the N.
    and S.E., became the meeting-place of the two great ravaging swarms
    which have desolated Europe: here the stalwart children of frozen
    Norway, the worshippers of Odin, clashed against the Saracens from
    torrid Arabia, the followers of Mahomet.  Nor can a greater proof be
    adduced of the power and relative superiority of the Cordovese Moors
    over the other nations of Europe, than this, their successful
    resistance to those fierce invaders, who overran without difficulty
    the coasts of England, France, Apulia, and Sicily: conquerors
    everywhere else, here they were driven back in disgrace.  Hence the
    bitter hatred of the Normans against the Spanish Moors, hence their
    alliances with the Catalans, where a Norman impression yet remains in
    architecture; but, as in Sicily, these barbarians, unrecruited from
    the North, soon died away, or were assimilated as usual with the more
    polished people, whom they had subdued by mere superiority of brute
    force.’

If the Moors called the Norsemen Al Madjus, which according to our author signifies Gog and
Magog, the Norsemen retorted by a far more definite and expressive nickname; this was Blue-skins
or Bluemen, doubtless in allusion to the livid countenances of the Moors.  The battles between
the Moors and the Northmen are frequently mentioned in the Sagas, none of which, however, are
of higher antiquity than the eleventh century.  In none of these chronicles do we find any
account of this raid upon Seville in 844; it was probably a very inconsiderable affair magnified
by the Moors and their historians.  Snorre speaks of the terrible attack of Sigurd, surnamed
the Jorsal wanderer, or Jerusalem pilgrim, upon Lisbon and Cintra, both of which places he
took, destroying the Moors by hundreds.  He subsequently ‘harried’ the southern coasts of Spain
on his voyage to Constantinople.  But this occurred some two hundred years after the affair
of Seville mentioned in the Handbook.  It does not appear that the Norse ever made any serious
attempt to establish their power in Spain; had they done so we have no doubt that they would
have succeeded. We entertain all due respect for the courage and chivalry of the Moors, especially
those of Cordova, but we would have backed the Norse, especially the pagan Norse, against the
best of them.  The Biarkemal would soon have drowned the Moorish ‘Lelhies.’

    ‘Thou Har, who grip’st thy foeman
    Right hard, and Rolf the bowman,
    And many, many others,
    The forky lightning’s brothers,
    Wake—not for banquet table,
    Wake—not with maids to gabble,
    But wake for rougher sporting,
    For Hildur’s bloody courting.’

Under the head of La Mancha our author has much to say on the subject of Don Quixote; and to
the greater part of what he says we yield our respectful assent.  His observations upon the
two principal characters in that remarkable work display much sound as well as original criticism.
We cannot however agree with him in preferring the second part, which we think a considerable
falling off from the first.  We should scarcely believe the two parts were written by the same
hand.  We have read through both various times, but we have always sighed on coming to the
conclusion of the first.  It was formerly our custom to read the Don ‘pervasively’ once every
three years; we still keep up that custom in part, and hope to do so whilst life remains. 
We say in part, because we now conclude with the first part going no farther.  We have little
sympathy with the pranks played off upon Sancho and his master by the Duke and Duchess, to
the description of which so much space is devoted; and as for the affair of Sancho’s government
at Barataria, it appears to us full of inconsistency and absurdity.  Barataria, we are told,
was a place upon the Duke’s estate, consisting of two or three thousand inhabitants; and of
such a place it was very possible for a nobleman to have made the poor squire governor; but
we no sooner get to Barataria than we find ourselves not in a townlet, but in a capital in
Madrid. The governor at night makes his rounds, attended by ‘an immense watch;’ he wanders
from one street to another for hours; he encounters all kinds of adventures, not mock but real
adventures, and all kinds of characters, not mock but real characters; there is talk of bull-circuses,
theatres, gambling-houses, and such like; and all this in a place of two or three thousand
inhabitants, in which, by the way, nothing but a cat is ever heard stirring after eight o’clock;
this we consider to be carrying the joke rather too far; and it is not Sancho but the reader
who is joked with.  But the first part is a widely different affair: all the scenes are admirable.
Should we live a thousand years, we should never forget the impression made upon us by the
adventure of the corpse, where the Don falls upon the priests who are escorting the bier by
torch light, and by the sequel thereto, his midnight adventures in the Brown Mountain.  We
can only speak of these scenes as astonishing—they have never been equalled in their line.
There is another wonderful book which describes what we may call the city life of Spain, as
the other describes the vida del campo—we allude of course to Le Sage’s novel, which as a whole
we prefer to Don Quixote, the characters introduced being certainly more true to nature than
those which appear in the other great work.  Shame to Spain that she has not long since erected
a statue to Le Sage, who has done so much to illustrate her; but miserable envy and jealousy
have been at the bottom of the feeling ever manifested in Spain towards that illustrious name.
There are some few stains in the grand work of Le Sage.  He has imitated without acknowledgment
three or four passages contained in the life of Obregon, a curious work, of which we have already
spoken, and to which on some future occasion we may perhaps revert.

But the Hand-book?  We take leave of it with the highest respect and admiration for the author;
and recommend it not only to travellers in Spain, but to the public in general, as a work of
a very high order, written con amore by a man who has devoted his whole time, talents, and
all the various treasures of an extensive learning to its execution.  We repeat that we were
totally unprepared for such a literary treat as he has here placed before us.  It is our sincere
wish that at his full convenience he will favour us with something which may claim consanguinity
with the present work.  It hardly becomes us to point out to an author subjects on which to
exercise his powers.

