WITHOUT DOGMA.

A NOVEL OF MODERN POLAND.

BY

HENRYK SIENKIEWICZ

AUTHOR OF "WITH FIRE AND SWORD," "THE DELUGE," "QUO VADIS," ETC.

TRANSLATED FROM THE POLISH BY

IZA YOUNG.

1893

"A man who leaves memoirs, whether well or badly written, provided they be sincere, renders
a service to future psychologists and writers, giving them not only a faithful picture of the
times, but likewise human documents that can be relied upon."

PUBLISHER'S PREFACE

In "WITHOUT DOGMA" we have a remarkable work, by a writer known only in this country through
his historical novels; and a few words concerning this novel and its author may not be without
interest.

Readers of Henryk Sienkiewicz in America, who have known him only through Mr. Curtin's fine,
strong translations, will be surprised to meet with a production so unlike "Fire and Sword,"
and "The Deluge," that on first reading one can scarcely believe it to be from the pen of the
great novelist.

"Fire and Sword," "The Deluge," and "Pan Michael" (now in press) form, so to speak, a Polish
trilogy. They are, first and last, Polish in sentiment, nationality, and patriotism. What Wagner
did for Germany in music, what Dumas did for France, and Scott for all English-speaking people,
the great Pole has achieved for his own country in literature. Even to those most unfamiliar
with her history, it grows life-like and real as it speaks to us from the pages of these historical
romances. Only a very great genius can unearth the dusty chronicles of past centuries, and
make its men and women live and breathe, and speak to us. These historical characters are not
mere shadows, puppets, or nullities, but very real men and women, our own flesh and blood.

His warriors fight, love, hate; they embrace each other; they laugh; they weep in each other's
arms; give each other sage counsels, with a truly Homeric simplicity. They are deep-versed
in stratagems of love and war, these Poles of the seventeenth century! They have their Nestor,
their Agamemnon, their great Achilles sulking in his tent. Oddly enough, at times they grow
very familiar to us, and in spite of their Polish titles and faces, and a certain tenderness
of nature that is almost feminine, they seem to have good, stout, Saxon stuff in them. Especially
where the illustrious knights recount their heroic deeds there is a Falstaffian strut in their
performance, and there runs riot a Falstaffian imagination truly sublime.

Yet, be it observed, however much in all this is suggestive of the literature of other races
and ages, these characters never cease for a moment to be Poles. Here is a vast, moving panorama
spread before us; across it pass mighty armies; hetman and banneret go by; the scene is full
of stir, life, action. It is constantly changing, so that at times we are almost bewildered,
attempting to follow the quick succession of events. "Certainly she does not know it," replied
Monsieur Voltaire, "but this scoundrel of a Jacques Haret knows it. Come here, Jacques Haret."

Jacques
advanced, all smiles and holding his fine hat and feathers in front of him to hide his broken
linen.

There is, too, a background against which these pictures paint themselves, and it reminds us
not a little of Verestchagin,--the same deep feeling for nature, and a certain sadness that
seems inseparable from the Russian and Lithuanian temperaments, tears following closely upon
mirth. At times, after incident upon incident of war, the reader is tempted to exclaim, "Something
too much of this!" Yet nowhere, perhaps, except from the great canvases of Verestchagin, has
there ever come a more awful, powerful plea for peace than from the pages of "Fire and Sword."

In "Without Dogma" is presented quite another theme, treated in a fashion strikingly different.
In the historical novels the stage is crowded with personages. In "Without Dogma," the chief
interest centres in a single character. This is not a battle between contending armies, but
the greater conflict that goes on in silence,--the battle of a man for his own soul.

He can scarcely be considered an heroic character; he is to some extent the creature of circumstances,
the fine product of a highly complex culture and civilization. He regards himself as a nineteenth-century
Hamlet, and for him not merely the times, but his race and all mankind, are out of joint. He
is not especially Polish save by birth; he is as little at home in Paris or at Rome as in Warsaw.
Set him down in any quarter of the globe and he would be equally out of place. He folds the
mantle of his pessimism about him. Life has interested him purely as a spectacle, in which
he plays no part save a purely passive one. His relation to life is that of the Greek chorus,
passing across the stage, crying "Woe, woe!"

Life has interested, entertained, and sometimes wearied him. He muses, philosophizes, utters
the most profound observations upon life, art, and the mystery of things. He puts mankind and
himself upon the dissecting-table.

Here is a nature so sensitive that it photographs every impression, an artistic temperament,
a highly endowed organism; yet it produces nothing. The secret of this unproductiveness lies
perhaps in a certain tendency to analyze and philosophize away every strong emotion that should
lead to action. Here is a man in possession of two distinct selves,--the one emotional, active;
the other eternally occupied in self-contemplation, judgment, and criticism. The one paralyzes
the other. He defines himself as "a genius without a portfolio," just as there are certain
ministers-of-state without portfolios.

In such a character many of us will find just enough of ourselves to make its weaknesses distasteful
to us. We resent, just because we recognize the truth of the picture. Leon Ploszowski belongs
unmistakably to our own times. His doubts and his dilettanteism are our own. His fine aesthetic
sense, his pessimism, his self-probings, his weariness, his overstrung nerves, his whole philosophy
of negation,--these are qualities belonging to this century, the outcome of our own age and
culture.

If this were all the book offers us one might well wonder why it was written. But its real
interest centres in the moment when the cultivated pessimist "without dogma" discovers that
the strongest and most genuine emotion of his life is its love for another man's wife. It is
an old theme; certainly two thirds of our modern French novels deal with it; we know exactly
how the conventional, respectable British novel would handle it. But here is a treatment, bold,
original, and unconventional. The character of the woman stands out in splendid contrast to
the man's. Its simplicity, strength, truth, and faith are the antidote for his doubt and weakness.
Her very weakness becomes her strength. Her dogmatism saves him.

The background of the book, its lesser incidents, are thoroughly artistic, its ending masterly
in its brevity and pathos; here again is the distinguishing mark of genius, the power of condensation.
The man who has philosophized and speculated now writes the tragedy of his life in four words:
"Aniela died this morning." This is the culmination towards which his whole life has been moving;
the rest is foregone conclusion, and matters but little.

One sees throughout the book the strong influence that other minds, Shakespeare notably, have
produced upon this mind; here its attitude is never merely pessimistic. It does not criticise
them, it has absorbed them.

One last word concerning this novel. It does not seek to formulate, or to preach directly.

A human document--the modern novel is this, when it is anything at all. If Mr. Crawford's canons
of literary art are true, and we believe they are, they give us a standard by which to judge;
he tells us that the heart in each man and woman means the whole body of innate and inherited
instincts, impulses, and beliefs, which, when quiescent, we call Self, when roused to emotional
activity, we call Heart. It is to this self, or heart, he observes, that whatever is permanent
in the novel must appeal; and whatever does so must live and find a hearing with humanity "so
long as humanity is human." If this be a test, we cannot doubt as to what will be the reception
of "Without Dogma."

A few words concerning the novelist himself. The facts obtainable are of the most meagre kind.
He was born in 1845, in Lithuania. The country itself, its natural and strongly religious and
political influences, its melancholy, seem to have left their strong, lasting impression upon
him. He has a passionate fondness for the Lithuanian, and paints him and his surroundings most
lovingly.

His student days were spent at Warsaw. He devoted himself afterward to literature, writing
at first under a pseudonym. He does not seem to have won immediate recognition. He spent some
years in California; a series of articles published in this connection in a Polish paper brought
him into notice.

In 1880, various novelettes and sketches of his production were published in three volumes.

In 1884 were given to the Polish public the three historical novels which immediately gave
their author the foremost place in Polish literature. It is a matter of pride that the first
translation of these great works into English is the work of an American, and offered to the
American public.

He is a prolific writer, and it would be impossible to attempt to give even the names of all
his minor sketches and romances. Some of them have been translated into German, but much has
been lost in the translation.

Sienkiewicz is still a contributor to journalistic literature. He has travelled much, and is
a citizen of the world. He is equally at home in the Orient or the West, by the banks of the
Dnieper, or beside the Nile. Probably there is scarcely a corner of Poland that he has not
explored. He depicts no type of life that has not actually come under his own observation.
The various social strata of his own country, the condition of its peasantry, the marked contrast
between the simplicity of that life and the culture of the ecclesiastic and aristocratic bodies,
the religious, poetic, artistic temperament of the people,--all these he paints in a life-like
fashion, but always as an artist.

So much of the writer. Of the man Sienkiewicz there is little to be obtained. Like all great
creative geniuses, he is so completely identified with his work that even while his personality
lives in his creations it eludes them. He offers us no confidences concerning himself, no opinions
or prejudices. He does not divert the reader with personalities. He sets before us certain
groups of men and women, whom certainly he knows and loves, and has lived among. He sets them
in motion; they become living, breathing creations; they assume relations in time and space;
they speak and act for themselves. If there be a prompter he remains always behind the scenes.
Admire or criticise or love the actors as you will, you cannot for a moment doubt that they
are alive.

This is the supreme miracle of genius,--the fine union of dramatic instinct, the aesthetic
sense, and an intense, vital realism; not the realism of the cesspool or the morgue, but the
realism of the earth and sky, and of healthy human nature. We are inclined to believe that
Henryk Sienkiewicz has answered an often discussed question that has much exercised the keenly
critical intellect of this age. One school of thought cries out, "Let us have life as it is.
Paint anything, but draw it as it is. Let the final test of all literary works be, 'Is it real
and true?'"

To the romantic school quite another class of ideas appeals; to it much of the so-called realistic
literature seems very bad, or merely "weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable." The profoundest
utterances of realism do not impress it much in themselves. It insists that art has something
to say to literature, that in this field as elsewhere holds good the law of natural selection
of types and survival of the fittest.

While each school has its down-sittings and up-risings, its supporters and its critics, neither
school has yet exhausted the possibilities of literature. The novel's aim is to depict Life,
and life is neither all romance nor all realism, but a curious mixture of both. Man is neither
a beast nor a celestial being, but a compound. He ran forward, refused to let them pay, and escorted
mademoiselle to a bench under the purple blooming lilac hedge where she could both see and hear
well.

"It is a very great honor, Mademoiselle," said Jacques Haret, "to entertain you in my theater."

Mademoiselle
Lecouvreur, with that smile which won all hearts, replied:
"I thank you very much, Monsieur. I can not be indifferent to the
actress who is to continue, and probably surpass, the Adrienne of
to-day."

We believe that just here lies the value of the novels of Henryk Sienkiewicz. He has worked
out the problem of the modern novel so as to satisfy the most ardent realist, but he has worked
it out upon great and broadly human lines. For him facts are facts indeed; but facts have souls
as well as bodies. His genius is analytic, but also imaginative and constructive; it is not
forever going upon botanizing excursions. He paints things and thoughts human.

The greatest genius assimilates unconsciously the best with which it comes in contact, and
by a subtle chemistry of its own makes new combinations. Shakespeare, Dante, Goethe, and the
realists, as well as all the forces of nature, have helped to make Henryk Sienkiewicz; yet
he is not any one of them. He is never merely imitative. Originality and imaginative fire,
a style vivid and strong, large humor, a profound pathos, a strong feeling for nature, and
a deep reverence for the forms and the spirit of religion, the breath of the true cosmopolitan
united with the intense patriotism of the Pole, a great creative genius,--these are the most
striking qualities of the work of this modern novelist, who has married Romance to Realism.

       *       *       *       *       *

WITHOUT DOGMA.

ROME, 9 January.

Some months ago I met my old friend and school-fellow, Jozef Sniatynski, who for the last few
years has occupied a prominent place among our literary men. In a discussion about literature
Sniatynski spoke about diaries. He seemed to think that most likely the novel of the future
would take the form of diary; finally he asserted that anybody who keeps a diary works for
the common good, and does a meritorious thing.

I am thirty-five, and do not remember ever having done anything for my country, for the reason,
maybe, that after leaving the University, my life, with slight intervals, was spent abroad.
This fact, so lightly touched upon, has given me, in spite of all my scepticism, many a bitter
pang; therefore I resolved to follow my friend's advice. If this indeed means work, with some
kind of merit in it, I will try to be of some use in this way.

I intend to be perfectly sincere. I enter upon the task, not only because of the above-mentioned
reasons, but also because the idea pleases me. Sniatynski says that if a man gets accustomed
to put down his thoughts and impressions it becomes gradually one of the most delightful occupations
of his life. If it should prove the contrary, then the Lord have mercy on my diary; it would
snap asunder like a string too tightly drawn. I am ready to do much for my community; but to
bore myself for its sake, oh, no! I could not do it.

Nevertheless, I am resolved not to be discouraged by first difficulties, and shall give it
a fair trial. "Do not adopt any style; do not write from a literary point of view," says Sniatynski.
Easier said than done. I fully understand that the greater the writer, the less he writes in
a purely literary style; but I am a dilettante, and have no command over any style. I know
from experience that to one who thinks much and feels deeply, it often seems that he has only
to put down his thoughts and feelings in order to produce something altogether out of the common;
yet as soon as he sets to work he falls into a certain mannerism of style and common phraseology;
his thoughts do not come spontaneously, and one might almost say that it is not the mind that
directs the pen, but the pen leads the mind into common, empty artificiality. I am afraid of
this for myself, for if I am wanting in eloquence, literary simplicity, or picturesqueness,
I am not wanting in good taste, and my own style might become distasteful to myself, and thereby
render my task impossible. But this I shall see later on. I begin my diary with a short introductory
autobiography.

My name is Leon Ploszowski, and I am, as I said before, thirty-five years of age. I come from
a wealthy family which has been able to preserve its fortune. As to myself I shall not increase
it, and at the same time I am not likely to squander it. My position is such that there is
no necessity for me to enter into competition with struggling humanity. As to expensive and
ruinous pleasures, I am a sceptic who knows how much they are worth, or rather, knows that
they are not worth anything.

My mother died a week after I was born. My father, who loved her more than his life, became
affected with melancholia. Even after he recovered from this, at Vienna, he did not wish to
return to his estates, as the memories associated with them rent his very soul; he left Ploszow
under the care of his sister, my aunt, and betook himself in the year 1848 to Rome, which,
during thirty-odd years, he never left once, so as to be near my mother's tomb. I forgot to
mention that he brought her remains to Rome, and buried her on the Campo Santo.

We have our own house on the Babuino, called Casa Osoria, from our coat of arms. It looks more
like a museum than anything else, as my father possesses no mean collections, especially from
the early Christian times. In these collections his whole life is now absorbed. As a young
man, he was very brilliant in appearance as well as in mind; his wealth and name added to this,
all roads were open to him, and consequently great things were expected from him. I know this
from his fellow-students at Berlin. He was deeply absorbed in the study of philosophy, and
it was generally believed his name would rank with such as Cieszkowski, Libelt, and others.
Society, and his being a favorite in female circles, diverted him somewhat from scientific
studies. In society he was known by the nickname of "Leon l'Invincible." In spite of his social
success he did not neglect his philosophical researches, and everybody expected that some day
he would electrify the world with a great work, and make his name illustrious. They were disappointed
in their expectations.

Of the once so beautiful appearance there still remains up to this day one of the finest and
noblest heads. Artists are of the same opinion, and not long ago one of them remarked that
it would be difficult to find a more perfect type of a patrician head. As to his scientific
career, my father is and remains a cultured and gifted nobleman-dilettante. I almost believe
dilettantism to be the fate of all Ploszowskis, to which I will refer later on, when I come
to write about myself. As to my father, there is in his desk a yellow manuscript about Triplicity
in Nature. I perused it, and it did not interest me. I only remember a comparison between the
transcendental belief of Christianity in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and the natural
triplicity of oxygen, hydrogen, and ozone, with many other analogous triplicities from absolute
truth, goodness, and beauty, to the syllogism of the minor premise, the major premise, and
the conclusion,--a quaint mixture of Hegel and Hoene-Wronski, and utterly useless. I am quite
convinced that my father did not intend to have it published, if only for the reason that speculative
philosophy had failed in him even before it was set aside by the world. The reason for this
failure was the death of my mother. My father, who in spite of his nickname, "Leon l'Invincible,"
and reputation of conqueror of hearts, was a man of deep feelings and simply worshipped my
mother, put many terrible questions to his philosophy, and not obtaining either answer or comfort,
recognized its utter emptiness in the presence of a great sorrow. This must have been an awful
tragedy of his life, since it almost shattered its foundations,--the brain and heart. His mind
became affected, as I said before, and when he recovered he went back to his religious convictions.
I was told that at one time he prayed night and day, knelt down in the street when he passed
a church, and was carried away by his religious fervor to such an extent that he was looked
upon by some as a madman, by others as a saint. It was evident he found more consolation in
this than in his philosophical triplicities, for he gradually calmed down and began to lead
a more rational life. His heart, with all his power for affection, turned towards me, and his
aesthetic bent found employment in the study of early Christianity. The lofty, restless mind
wanted nourishment. After his first year in Rome he took up archaeology, and by dint of hard
study acquired a thorough knowledge of the antique.

Father Calvi, my first tutor and at the same time a great judge of Roman antiquities, gave
him the final impulse towards investigation of the Eternal City. Some fifteen years ago my
father became acquainted and subsequently on terms of friendship with the great Rossi, in whose
company he spent whole days in the catacombs. Thanks to his extraordinary gifts he soon acquired
such consummate knowledge of Rome as to astonish Rossi himself. Several times he began writing
treatises on the subject, but never finished what he had begun. Maybe the completion of his
collections took up too much of his time, but most likely the reason he will not leave anything
behind him except his collections is that he did not confine himself to one epoch or any specialty
in his researches. Gradually mediaeval Rome began to fascinate him as much as the first era
of Christianity. There was a time when his mind was full of Orsinis and Colonnas; after that
he approached the Renaissance, and was fairly captivated by it. He began to tell me that he had
the finest child actress in his troupe he had ever seen. "So tragic, so moving, so graceful, so droll,
so natural; she could, in two years more, wrest the laurels from the brow of Mademoiselle Lecouvreur
herself!" So he declared, again whacking me on the back.

I was not much interested in his child actress, but bluntly asked
him how he got the use of Madame Riano's garden.

"The easiest thing
in the world," he said, laughing.

As to these collections my father has a singular idea. He wants to bequeath them to Rome under
the condition they should be placed in a separate gallery named after him, "Museum Osoria Ploszowski."
Of course his wishes will be respected. I only wonder why my father believes that in doing
this he will be more useful to his community than by sending them to his own country.

