    Much of the time he sleeps, or half sleeps.... I often come and
    sit by him in perfect silence; he will breathe for ten minutes as
    softly and evenly as a young babe asleep. Poor youth, so
    handsome, athletic, with profuse beautiful shining hair. One time
    as I sat looking at him while he lay asleep, he suddenly, without
    the least start awaken'd, open'd his eyes, gave me a long steady
    look, turning his face very slightly to gaze easier--one long,
    clear, silent look--a slight sigh--then turn'd back and went into
    his doze again. Little he knew, poor death-stricken boy, the
    heart of the stranger that hover'd near.

    The western star, Venus, in the earlier hours of evening has
    never been so large, so clear; it seems as if it told something,
    as if it held rapport indulgent with humanity, with us Americans.
    The sky dark blue, the transparent night, the planets, the
    moderate west wind, the elastic temperature, the miracle of that
    great star, and the young and swelling moon swimming in the west,
    suffused the soul. Then I heard slow and clear the deliberate
    notes of a bugle come up out of the silence ... firm and
    faithful, floating along, rising, falling leisurely, with here
    and there a long-drawn note.... sounding tattoo.

"A steady rain, dark and thick and warm," he writes again, two days after Gettysburg. "The
cavalry camp is a ceaseless field of observation to me. This forenoon there stood the horses,
tether'd together, dripping, steaming, chewing their hay. The men emerge from their tents,
dripping also. The fires are half-quench'd." There is a poetic poise in this brief, vivid statement,
apart from its bare economy of means. It is the lump awaiting the leaven no less than is "Cavalry
Crossing a Ford." To this supreme spectator an apple orchard in May, even the White House in
moonlight, no more and no less than these battle-scenes, rendered up their dignity, life, and
beauty, their true human significance. But in "Drum-Taps" the witness is not always so satisfactory.
The secret has evaporated in the effort to make poetry, or half-consciously to inject a moral,
to play the Universal Bard. There creeps into the words a tinge of the raw and the grotesque.
The poet has the look of a cowboy off the stage, tanned with grease-paint. But again and again
the secret creeps back and some lovely emanation of poetry is added to it:

  Look down fair moon and bathe this scene,
  Pour softly down night's nimbus floods on faces ghastly, swollen,
            purple,
  On the dead on their backs with arms toss'd wide,
  Pour down your unstinted nimbus sacred moon.

Or this, called "Reconciliation":

  Word over all, beautiful as the sky,
  Beautiful that war and all its deeds of carnage must in time be
            utterly lost,
  That the hands of the sisters Death and Night incessantly softly wash
            again, and ever again, this soil'd world;
  For my enemy is dead, a man divine as myself is dead,
  I look where he lies white-faced and still in the coffin--I draw
            near,
  Bend down and touch lightly with my lips the white face in the
            coffin.

The bonds of rhyme shackled him, deprived him of more than freedom. He is like a wild bird
that suddenly perceives the bars of its small cage across the blue of the sky. And yet the
finer his poems are, the nearer they approach to definite rhythmical design. One has only to
compare "O Captain! my Captain!" with "Hushed be the Camps To-day" to perceive this curious
paradox. They are both of them memories of his beloved Lincoln, whom he had many times seen,
with that peculiarly close and transatlantic curiosity of his, riding at a jog-trot, on a good-sized,
easy-going grey horse, with his escort of yellow-striped cavalry behind him, through the streets
of Washington--dressed in black, somewhat rusty and dusty, with a black, stiff hat, almost
as ordinary in attire as the commonest man. That heroic face, too, he had pierced; and caught
from it the deep, subtle, indirect expression, that only the long-gone master-painters of the
Old World could have seized and immortalized. And in yet another memory of this great American
Whitman attains to his best and highest, "When Lilacs Last in the Doorway Bloom'd." It is one
of the most beautiful of poems, of the purest intuition, of a consummate, if unconscious, artistry.
Whose voice is it that rings and echoes, now low and tender, now solemn and desolate, now clear,
full, victorious, out of its cloistral solitude--that of the mourner himself, of all-heedfull,
heedless Nature, of the immortal soul of man, or just a bird, the shy and hidden, sweet, small
hermit thrush? The last division of his life's work--his fond Epic, his cosmic "inventory"--as
Whitman planned it, was to be devoted to the chaunting of songs of death and immortality. The
soldier to whom he read of Christ's Resurrection talked of death to him, and said he did not
fear it. He talked to a man who did not enjoy religion in the way a Christian means, to whom
the mystery of Easter is an all-sufficing "reliance." But Whitman not only did not fear death.
The thought of it was to him the strangest of raptures, the reverie of a child dreaming of
a distant mother, soon to come again.

EIGHTEEN SIXTY-ONE.

  Arm'd year--year of the struggle,
  No dainty rhymes or sentimental love verses for you terrible year,
  Not you as some pale poetling seated at a desk lisping cadenzas
            piano,
  But as a strong man erect, clothed in blue clothes, advancing,
            carrying a rifle on your shoulder,
  With well-gristled body and sunburnt face and hands, with a knife in
            the belt at your side,
  As I heard you shouting loud, your sonorous voice ringing across the
            continent,
  Your masculine voice O year, as rising amid the great cities,
  Amid the men of Manhattan I saw you as one of the workmen, the
            dwellers in Manhattan,
  Or with large steps crossing the prairies out of Illinois and
            Indiana,
  Rapidly crossing the West with springy gait and descending the
            Alleghanies,
  Or down from the great lakes or in Pennsylvania, or on deck along the
            Ohio river,
  Or southward along the Tennessee or Cumberland rivers, or at
            Chattanooga on the mountain top,
  Saw I your gait and saw I your sinewy limbs clothed in blue, bearing
            weapons, robust year,
  Heard your determin'd voice launch'd forth again and again,
  Year that suddenly sang by the mouths of the round-lipp'd cannon,
  I repeat you, hurrying, crashing, sad, distracted year.

FROM PAUMANOK STARTING I FLY LIKE A BIRD

  From Paumanok starting I fly like a bird,
  Around and around to soar to sing the idea of all,
  To the north betaking myself to sing there arctic songs,
  To Kanada till I absorb Kanada in myself, to Michigan then,
  To Wisconsin, Iowa, Minnesota, to sing their songs, (they are
            inimitable;)
  Then to Ohio and Indiana to sing theirs, to Missouri and Kansas and
            Arkansas to sing theirs,
  To Tennessee and Kentucky, to the Carolinas and Georgia to sing
            theirs,
  To Texas and so along up toward California, to roam accepted
            everywhere;
  To sing first, (to the tap of the war-drum if need be,)
  The idea of all, of the Western world one and inseparable,
  And then the song of each member of these States. 

He was so much interested that he did not notice the crowd that gathered
gradually round him, but he worked steadily on until the figure was
finished.

  
  
  Just as the band of monks had stood silent round his first
  picture in the cloister of the Carmine, so these dark Moors stood
still in wonder and amazement gazing upon the bold black figure sketched
upon the smooth white wall.

  
  
            No one had
  ever seen such a thing in that land before, and it seemed to them
  that this man must be a dealer in magic.

  Then the Mother of All with calm voice speaking,
  As to you Rebellious, (I seemed to hear her say,) why strive against
            me, and why seek my life?
  When you yourself forever provide to defend me?
  For you provided me Washington--and now these also.

THE CENTENARIAN'S STORY.

  Volunteer of 1861-2, (at Washington Park, Brooklyn, assisting the
            Centenarian.)

  Give me your hand old Revolutionary,
  The hill-top is nigh, but a few steps, (make room gentlemen,)
  Up the path you have follow'd me well, spite of your hundred and
            extra years,
  You can walk old man, though your eyes are almost done,
  Your faculties serve you, and presently I must have them serve me.
  Rest, while I tell what the crowd around us means,
  On the plain below recruits are drilling and exercising,
  There is the camp, one regiment departs to-morrow,
  Do you hear the officers giving their orders?
  Do you hear the clank of the muskets?

  Why what comes over you now old man?
  Why do you tremble and clutch my hand so convulsively?
  The troops are but drilling, they are yet surrounded with smiles.
  Around them at hand the well-drest friends and the women,
  While splendid and warm the afternoon sun shines down,
  Green the midsummer verdure and fresh blows the dallying breeze,
  O'er proud and peaceful cities and arm of the sea between.
  But drill and parade are over, they march back to quarters,
  Only hear that approval of hands! hear what a clapping!

  As wending the crowds now part and disperse--but we old man,
  Not for nothing have I brought you hither--we must remain,
  You to speak in your turn, and I to listen and tell.

  The Centenarian.

  When I clutch'd your hand it was not with terror,
  But suddenly pouring about me here on every side,
  And below there where the boys were drilling, and up the slopes they
            ran,
  And where tents are pitch'd, and wherever you see south and
            south-east and south-west,
  Over hills, across lowlands, and in the skirts of woods,
  And along the shores, in mire (now fill'd over) came again and
            suddenly raged,
  As eighty-five years a-gone no mere parade receiv'd with applause of
            friends,
  But a battle which I took part in myself--aye, long ago as it is I
            took part in it,
  Walking then this hill-top, this same ground.

  Aye, this is the ground,
  My blind eyes even as I speak behold it re-peopled from graves,
  The years recede, pavements and stately houses disappear,
  Rude forts appear again, the old hoop'd guns are mounted,
  I see the lines of rais'd earth stretching from river to bay,
  I mark the vista of waters, I mark the uplands and slopes;
  Here we lay encamp'd, it was this time in summer also.

  As I talk I remember all, I remember the Declaration,
  It was read here, the whole army paraded, it was read to us here,
  By his staff surrounded the General stood in the middle, he held up
            his unsheath'd sword,
  It glitter'd in the sun in full sight of the army.

  'Twas a bold act then--the English war-ships had just arrived,
  We could watch down the lower bay where they lay at anchor,
  And the transports swarming with soldiers.

  A few days more and they landed, and then the battle.

  Twenty thousand were brought against us,
  A veteran force furnish'd with good artillery.
  I tell not now the whole of the battle,
  But one brigade early in the forenoon order'd forward to engage the
            red-coats,
  Of that brigade I tell, and how steadily it march'd,
  And how long and well it stood confronting death.

  Who do you think that was marching steadily sternly confronting
            death?
  It was the brigade of the youngest men, two thousand strong,
  Raised in Virginia and Maryland, and most of them known personally to
            the General.

  Jauntily forward they went with quick step toward Gowanus' waters,
  Till of a sudden unlook'd for by defiles through the woods, gain'd at
            night,
  The British advancing, rounding in from the east, fiercely playing
            their guns,
  That brigade of the youngest was cut off and at the enemy's mercy.

  The General watch'd them from this hill,
  They made repeated desperate attempts to burst their environment,
  They drew close together, very compact, their flag flying in the
            middle,
  But O from the hills how the cannon were thinning and thinning them!

  It sickens me yet, that slaughter!
  I saw the moisture gather in drops on the face of the General.
  I saw how he wrung his hands in anguish.

  Meanwhile the British manoeuvr'd to draw us out for a pitch'd battle,
  But we dared not trust the chances of a pitch'd battle.

  We fought the fight in detachments.
  Sallying forth we fought at several points, but in each the luck was
            against us,
  Our foe advancing, steadily getting the best of it, push'd us back to
            the works on this hill,
  Till we turn'd menacing here, and then he left us.

  That was the going out of the brigade of the youngest men, two
            thousand strong,
  Few return'd, nearly all remain in Brooklyn.
  That and here my General's first battle,
  No women looking on nor sunshine to bask in, it did not conclude with
            applause,
  Nobody clapp'd hands here then.

  But in darkness in mist on the ground under a chill rain,
  Wearied that night we lay foil'd and sullen,
  While scornfully laugh'd many an arrogant lord oft' against us
            encamp'd,
  Quite within hearing, feasting, clinking wineglasses together over
            their victory.

  So dull and damp and another day,
  But the night of that, mist lifting, rain ceasing,
  Silent as a ghost while they thought they were sure of him, my
            General retreated.

  I saw him at the river-side,
  Down by the ferry lit by torches, hastening the embarcation;
  My General waited till the soldiers and wounded were all pass'd over,
  And then, (it was just ere sunrise,) these eyes rested on him for the
            last time.

  Every one else seem'd fill'd with gloom,
  Many no doubt thought of capitulation.

  But when my General pass'd me,
  As he stood in his boat and look'd toward the coming sun,
  I saw something different from capitulation.

  Terminus.

  Enough, the Centenarian's story ends,
  The two, the past and present, have interchanged,
  I myself as connecter, as chansonnier of a great future, am now
            speaking.

  And is this the ground Washington trod?
  And these waters I listlessly daily cross, are these the waters he
            cross'd,
  As resolute in defeat as other generals in their proudest triumphs?

  I must copy the story, and send it eastward and westward,
  I must preserve that look as it beam'd on you rivers of Brooklyn.

  See--as the annual round returns the phantoms return,
  It is the 27th of August and the British have landed,
  The battle begins and goes against us, behold through the smoke
            Washington's face,
  The brigade of Virginia and Maryland have march'd forth to intercept
            the enemy,
  They are cut off, murderous artillery from the hills plays upon them,
  Rank after rank falls, while over them silently droops the flag,
  Baptized that day in many a young man's bloody wounds,
  In death, defeat, and sisters', mothers' tears.

