There were other chronicles in plenty; there were the histories of AElius Maurus, of Marius
Maximus, and that of Spartian, but they are lost. There is a page or two in the abbreviation
which Xiphilin made of Dion; Aurelius Victor has a little to add, so also has Eutropus, but,
practically speaking, there is, apart from that column, nothing save conjecture.

Campaigns are wearisome reading, but not the one that is pictured there. You ask a curve a
question, and in the next you find the reply. There is a point, however, on which it is dumb--the
origin of the war. But if you wish to know the result, not the momentary and transient result,
but the sequel which futurity held, look at the ruins at that column's base.

The origin of the war was Domitian's diplomacy. The chieftain whom he had made king, and who
had been surprised enough at receiving a diadem instead of the point of a sword, fancied, and
not unreasonably, that the annuity which Rome paid him was to continue forever. But Domitian,
though a god, was not otherwise immortal. When he died abruptly the annuity ceased. The Dacian
king sent word that he was surprised at the delay, but he must have been far more so at the
promptness with which he got Trajan's reply. It was a blare of bugles, which he thought forever
dumb; a flight of eagles, which he thought were winged.

In the spirals of the column you see the advancing army, the retreating foe; then the Dacian
dragon saluting the standards of Rome; peace declared, and an army, whose very repose is menacing,
standing there to see that peace is kept. And was it? In the ascending spiral is the new revolt,
the attempt to assassinate Trajan, the capture of the conspirators, the advance of the legions,
the retreat of the Dacians, burning their cities as they go, carrying their wounded and their
women with them, and at last pressing about a huge cauldron that is filled with poison, fighting
among themselves for a cup of the brew, and rolling on the ground in the convulsions of death.
Farther on is the treasure of the king. To hide it he had turned a river from its source, sunk
the gold in a vault beneath, and killed the workmen that had labored there. Beyond is the capture
of the capital, the suicide of the chief, a troop of soldiers driving captives and cattle before
them, the death of a nation and the end of war.

The subsequent triumph does not appear on the column. It is said that ten thousand beasts were
slaughtered in the arenas, slaughtering, as they fell, a thousand of their slaughterers. But
the spectacle, however fair, was not of a nature to detain Trajan long in Rome. The air there
had not improved in the least, and presently he was off again, this time on the banks of the
Euphrates, arguing with the Parthians, avoiding danger in the only way he knew, by facing it.

It was then that the sheen of the purple glowed. If lustreless at home, it was royally red
abroad. In a campaign that was little more than a triumphant promenade he doubled the empire.
To the world of Caesar he added that of Alexander. Allies he turned into subjects, vassals
into slaves. Armenia, Mesopotamia, Assyria, were added to the realm. Trajan's footstools were
diadems. He had moved back one frontier, he moved another. From Britain to the Indus, Rome
was mistress of the earth. Had Trajan been younger, China, whose very name was unknown, would
have yielded to him her corruption, her printing press, her powder and her tea.

That he would have enjoyed these things is not at all conjectural. He was then an old man,
but he was not a good one--at least not in the sense we use the term to-day. He had habits
which are regarded now less as vices than perversions, but which at that time were taken as
a matter of course and accepted by everyone, even by the stoics, very calmly, with a grain
of Attic salt at that. Men were regarded as virtuous when they were brave, when they were honest;
the idea of using the expression in its later sense occurred, if at all, in jest merely, as
a synonym for the eunuch. It was the matron and the vestal who were supposed to be straight,
and their straightness was wholly supposititious. The ceremonies connected with the phallus,
and those observed in the worship of the Bona Dea, were of a nature that no virtue could withstand.
Every altar, Juvenal said, had its Clodius, and even in Clodius' absence there were always
those breaths of Sapphic song that blew through Mitylene.

It is just that absence of a quality which we regard as an added grace; one, parenthetically,
which dowered the world with a new conception of beauty that makes it difficult to picture
Rome. Modern ink has acquired Nero's blush; it comes very readily, yet, however sensitive a
writer may be, once Roman history is before him, he may violate it if he choose; he may even
give it a child, but never can he make it immaculate. He may skip, indeed, if he wish; and
it is because he has skipped so often that one fancies that Augustus was all right. The rain
of fire which fell on the cities that mirrored their towers in the Bitter Sea, might just as
well have fallen on him, on Vergil, too, on Caligula, Claud, Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Titus,
Domitian, and particularly on Trajan.

As lieutenant in the latter's triumphant promenade, was a nephew, AElius Hadrianus, a young
man for whom Trajan's wife is rumored to have had more than a platonic affection, and who in
younger days was numbered among Trajan's mignons. During the progress of that promenade Trajan
fell ill. The command of the troops was left to Hadrian, and Trajan started for Rome. On the
way he died. In what manner is not known; his wife, however, was with him, and it was in her
hand that a letter went to the senate stating that Trajan had adopted Hadrian as his heir.
Trajan had done nothing of the sort. The idea had indeed occurred to him, but long since it
had been abandoned. He had even formally selected someone else, but his wife was with him,
and her lover commanded the troops. The lustre of the purple, always dazzling, had fascinated
Hadrian's eyes. Did he steal it? One may conjecture, yet never know. In any event it was his,
and he folded it very magnificently about him. Still young, a trifle over thirty, handsome,
unusually accomplished, grand seigneur to his finger-tips, endowed with a manner which is rumored
to have been one of great charm, possessed of the amplest appreciation of the elegancies of
life, he had precisely the figure which purple adorns. But, though the lustre had fascinated,
he too knew its spell; and presently he started off on a journey about the world, which lasted
fifteen years, and which, when ended, left the world the richer for his passing, decorated
with the monuments he had strewn. Before that journey began, at the earliest rumor of Trajan's
death, the Euphrates and Tigris awoke, the cinders of Nineveh flamed. The rivers and land that
lay between knew that their conqueror had gone. Hadrian knew it also, and knew too that, though
he might occupy the warrior's throne, he never could fill the warrior's place. To Armenia,
Mesopotamia, Assyria, freedom was restored. Dacia could have had it for the asking. But over
Dacia the toga had been thrown; it was as Roman as Gaul. A corner of it is Roman still; the
Roumanians are there. But though Dacia was quiet, in its neighborhood the restless Sarmatians
prowled and threatened. Hadrian, who had already written a book on tactics, knew at once how
to act. Domitian's policy was before him; he followed the precedent, and paid the Sarmatians
to be still. It requires little acumen to see that when Rome permitted herself to be blackmailed
the end was near.

For the time being, however, there was peace, and in its interest Hadrian set out on that unequalled
journey over a land that was his. Had fate relented, Trajan could have made a wider one still.
But in Trajan was the soldier merely, when he journeyed it was with the sword. In Hadrian was
the dilettante, the erudite too; he travelled not to conquer, but to learn, to satisfy an insatiable
curiosity, for self-improvement, for glory too. Behind him was an army, not of soldiers, but
of masons, captained by architects, artists and engineers. Did a site please him, there was
a temple at once, or if not that, then a bridge, an aqueduct, a library, a new fashion, sovereignty
even, but everywhere the spectacle of an emperor in flesh and blood. For the first time the
provinces were able to understand that a Caesar was not necessarily a brute, a phantom and a god.

It would have been interesting to have made one of that court of poets and savants that surrounded
him; to have dined with him in Paris, eaten oysters in London; sat with him while he watched
that wall go up before the Scots, and then to have passed down again through a world still
young--a world beautiful, ornate, unutilitarian; a world to which trams, advertisements and
telegraph poles had not yet come; a world that still had illusions, myths and mysteries; one
in which religion and poetry went hand in hand--a world without newspapers, hypocrisy and cant.

Hadrian, doubtless, enjoyed it. He was young enough to have enthusiasms and to show them; he
was one of the best read men of the day; he was poet, painter, sculptor, musician, erudite
and emperor in one. Of course he enjoyed it. The world, over which he travelled, was his, not
by virtue of the purple alone, but because of his knowledge of it. The prince is not necessarily
cosmopolitan; the historian and antiquarian are. Hadrian was an early Quinet, an earlier Champollion;
always the thinker, sometimes the cook. And to those in his suite it must have been a sight
very unique to see a Caesar who had published his volume of erotic verse, just as any other
young man might do; who had hunted lions, not in the arena, but in Africa, make researches
on the plain where Troy had been, and a supreme of sow's breast, peacock, pheasant, ham and
boar, which he called Pentapharmarch, and which he offered as he had his Catacriani--the erotic
verse--as something original and nice.

Insatiably inquisitive, verifying a history that he was preparing in the lands which gave that
history birth, he passed through Egypt and Asia, questioning sphinxes, the cerements of kings,
the arcana of the temples; deciphering the sacred books, arguing with magi, interrogating the
stars. For the thinker, after the fashion of the hour, was astrologer too, and one of the few
anecdotes current concerning him is in regard to a habit he had of drawing up on the 31st of
December the events of the coming year. After consulting the stars on that 31st of December
which occurred in the twenty-second year of his reign, he prepared a calendar which extended
only to the 10th of July. On that day he died.

The calendar does not seem to have been otherwise serviceable. It was in Bithynia he found
a shepherd whose appearance which, in its perfection, was quite earthly, suggested neither
heaven nor hell, but some planet where the atmosphere differs from ours; where it is pink,
perhaps, or faintly ochre; where birth and death have forms higher than here.

Hadrian, captivated, led the lad in leash. The facts concerning that episode have been so frequently
given that the repetition is needless here. Besides, the point is elsewhere. Presently the
lad fell overboard. Hadrian lost a valet, Rome an emperor, and Olympus a god. But in attempting
to deify the lost lackey, the grief of Hadrian was so immediate, that it is permissible to
fancy that the lad's death was not one of those events which the emperor-astrologer noted beforehand
on his calendar. The lad was decently buried, the Nile gave up her dead, and on the banks a
fair city rose, one that had its temples, priests, altars and shrines; a city that worshipped
a star, and called that star Antinous. Hadrian then could have congratulated himself. Even
Caligula would have envied him. He had done his worst; he had deified not a lad, but a lust.
And not for the moment alone. A half century later Tertullian noted that the worship still
endured, and subsequently the Alexandrine Clement discovered consciences that Antinous had
reproached.

Antinous, deified, was presently forgot. A young Roman, wonderfully beautiful, Dion says, yet
singularly effeminate; a youth who could barely carry a shield; who slept between rose-leaves
and lilies; who was an artist withal; a poet who had written lines that Martial might have
mistaken for his own, Cejonius Verus by name, succeeded the Bithynian shepherd. Hadrian, who
would have adopted Antinous, adopted Verus in his stead. But Hadrian was not happy in his choice.
Verus died, and singularly enough, Hadrian selected as future emperor the one ruler against
whom history has not a reproach, Pius Antonin.

Meanwhile the journey continued. The Thousand and One Nights were realized then if ever. The
beauty of the world was at its apogee, the glory of Rome as well; and through secrets and marvels
Hadrian strolled, note-book in hand, his eyes unwearied, his curiosity unsatiated still. To
pleasure him the intervales took on a fairer glow; cities decked themselves anew, the temples
unveiled their mysteries; and when he passed to the intervales liberty came; to the cities,
sovereignty; to the temples, shrines. The world rose to him as a woman greets her lover. His
travels were not fatigues; they were delights, in which nations participated, and of which
the memories endure as though enchanted still.

It would have been interesting, no doubt, to have dined with him in Paris; to have quarried
lions in their African fens; to have heard archaic hymns ripple through the rushes of the Nile;
to have lounged in the Academe, to have scaled Parnassus, and sailed the AEgean Sea; but, a
history and an arm-chair aiding, the traveller has but to close his eyes and the past returns.
Without disturbing so much as a shirt-box, he may repeat that promenade. Triremes have foundered;
litters are out of date; painted elephants are no more; the sky has changed, climates with
it; there are colors, as there are arts, that have gone from us forever; there are desolate
plains, where green and yellow was; the shriek of steam where gods have strayed; advertisements
in sacred groves; Baedekers in ruins that never heard an atheist's voice; solitudes where there
were splendors; the snarl of jackals where once were birds and bees--yet, history and the arm-chair
aiding, it all returns. Any traveller may follow in Hadrian's steps; he is stayed but once--on
the threshold of the Temple of Eleusis. It is there history gropes, impotent and blind, and
it is there the interest of that journey culminated.

Beyond the episode connected with Antinous, Hadrian's journey was marked by another, one which
occurred in Judaea. Both were infamous, no doubt, but, what is more to the point, both mark
the working of the poison in the purple that he bore.

Since Titus had gone, despairful Judaea had taken heart again. Hope in that land was inextinguishable.
The walls of Jerusalem were still standing; in the Temple the offices continued. Though Rome
remained, there was Israel too. Passing that way one afternoon, Hadrian mused. The city affected
him; the site was superb. And as he mused it occurred to him that Jerusalem was less harmonious
to the ear than Hadrianopolis; that the Temple occupied a position on which a Capitol would
look far better; in brief, that Jehovah might be advantageously replaced by Jove. The army
of masons that were ever at his heels were set to work at once. They had received similar orders
and performed similar tasks so often that they could not fancy anyone would object. The Jews
did. They fought as they had never fought before; they fought for three years against a Nebuchadnezzar
who created torrents of blood so abundant that stones were carried for miles, and who left
corpses enough to fertilize the land for a decade. The survivors were sold. Those for whom
no purchasers could be found had their heads amputated. Jerusalem was razed to the ground.
The site of the Temple was furrowed by the plow, sown with salt, and in place of the City of
David rose AElia Capitolina, a miniature Rome, whose gates, save on one day in the year, Jews
were forbidden under penalty of death to pass, were forbidden to look at, and over which were
images of swine, pigs with scornful snouts, the feet turned inward, the tail twisted like a lie.

It was not honorable warfare, but it was effective; then, too, it was Hadrianesque, the mad
insult of a madman to a race as mad as he. The purple had done its work. History has left the
rise of this emperor conjectural; his fall is written in blood. As he began he ended, a poet
and a beast.

Presently he was in Rome. It was not homesickness that took him there; he was far too cosmopolitan
to suffer from any such malady as that. It was the accumulations of a fifteen-year excursion
through the metropoles of art which demanded a gallery of their own. Another with similar tastes
and similar power might have ordered everything which pleasured his eye to be carted to Rome,
but in his quality of artifex omnipotens Hadrian embellished and never sacked. There were painters
and sculptors enough in that army at his heels, and whatever appealed to him was copied on
the spot. So much was copied that a park of ten square miles was just large enough to form
the open-air museum which he had designed, one which centuries of excavation have not exhausted
yet.

The museum became a mad-house. Hadrian was ill; tired in mind and body, smitten with imperialia.
It was then the young Verus died, leaving for a wonder a child behind, and more wonderful still,
Antonin was adopted. Through Rome, meanwhile, terror stalked. Hadrian, in search of a remedy
against his increasing confusion of mind, his visible weakness of body, turned from physicians
to oracles; from them to magic, and then to blood. He decimated the senate. Soldiers, freemen,
citizens, anybody and everybody were ordered off to death. He tried to kill himself and failed;
he tried again, wondering, no doubt, why he who commanded death for others could not command
it for himself. Presently he succeeded, and Antonin--the pious Antonin, as the senate called
him--marshalled from cellars and crypts the senators and citizens whom Hadrian had ordered
to be destroyed.

VIII

FAUSTINE

Anyone who has loitered a moment among the statues in the Salle des Antonins at the Louvre
will recall the bust of the Empress Faustina. It stands near the entrance, coercing the idler
to remove his hat; to stop a moment, to gaze and dream. The face differs from that which Mr.
Swinburne has described. In the poise of the head, in the expression of the lips, particularly
in the features which, save the low brow, are not of the Roman type, there is a commingling
of just that loveliness and melancholy which must have come to Psyche when she lost her god.
In the corners of the mouth, in the droop of the eyelids, in the moulding of the chin, you
may see that rarity--beauty and intellect in one--and with it the heightening shadow of an
eternal regret. Before her Marcus Aurelius, her husband, stands, decked with the purple, with
all the splendor of the imperator, his beard in overlapping curls, his questioning eyes dilated.
Beyond is her daughter, Lucille, less fair than the mother, a healthy girl of the dairymaid
type. Near by is the son, Commodus. Across the hall is Lucius Verus, the husband of Lucille;
in a corner, Antonin, Faustine's father, and, more remotely, his wife. Together they form quite
a family group, and to the average tourist they must seem a thoroughly respectable lot. Antonin
certainly was respectable. He was the first emperor who declined to be a brute. Referring to
his wife he said that he would rather be with her in a desert than without her in a palace;
the speech, parenthetically, of a man who, though he could have cited that little Greek princess,
Nausicaa, as a precedent, was too well-bred to permit so much as a fringe of his household
linen to flutter in public. Besides, at his hours, he was a poet, and it is said that if a
poet tell a lie twice he will believe it. Antonin so often declared his wife to be a charming
person that in the end no doubt he thought so. She was not charming, however, or if she were,
her charm was not that of exclusiveness.

It was in full sight of this lady's inconsequences that Faustine was educated. Wherever she
looked, the candors of her girlhood were violated. The phallus then was omnipresent. Iamblicus,
not the novelist, but the philosopher, has much to say on the subject; as has Arnobius in the
Adversus gentes, and Lactance in the De falsa religione. If Juvenal, Martial, Petronius, are
more reticent, it is because they were not Fathers of the Church, nor yet antiquarians. No
one among us exacts a description of a spire. The phallus was as common to them, commoner even.
It was on the coins, on the doors, in the gardens. As a preservative against Envy it hung from
children's necks. On sun-dials and water clocks it marked the flight of time. The vestals worshipped
it. At weddings it was used in a manner which need not be described.

It was from such surroundings that Faustine stepped into the arms of the severe and stately
prince whom her father had chosen. That Marcus Aurelius adored her is certain. His notebook
shows it. A more tender-hearted and perfect lover romance may show, but history cannot. He
must have been the quintessence of refinement, a thoroughbred to his finger-tips; one for whom
that purple mantle was too gaudy, and yet who bore it, as he bore everything else, in that
self-abnegatory spirit which the higher reaches of philosophy bring.

He was of that rare type that never complains and always consoles.

After Antonin's death, his hours ceased to be his own. On the Euphrates there was the wildest
disorder. To the north new races were pushing nations over the Danube and the Rhine. From the
catacombs Christ was emerging; from the Nile, Serapis. The empire was in disarray. Antonin
had provided his son-in-law with a coadjutor, Lucius Verus, the son of Hadrian's mignon, a
magnificent scoundrel; a tall, broad-shouldered athlete, with a skin as fresh as a girl's and
thick curly hair, which he covered with a powder of gold; a viveur, whose suppers are famous
still; whose guests were given the slaves that served them, the plate off which they had eaten,
the cups from which they had drunk--cups of gold, cups of silver, jewelled cups, cups from
Alexandria, murrhine vases filled with nard--cars and litters to go home with, mules with silver
trappings and negro muleteers. Capitolinus says that, while the guests feasted, sometimes the
magnificent Verus got drunk, and was carried to bed in a coverlid, or else, the red feather
aiding, turned out and fought the watch.

It was this splendid individual to whom Marcus Aurelius entrusted the Euphrates. They had been
brought up together, sharing each others tutors, writing themes for the same instructor, both
meanwhile adolescently enamored of the fair Faustine. It was to Marcus she was given, the empire
as a dower; and when that dower passed into his hands, he could think of nothing more equitable
than to ask Verus to share it with him. Verus was not stupid enough to refuse, and at the hour
when the Parthians turned ugly, he needed little urging to set out for the East, dreaming,
as he did so, of creating there an empire that should be wholly his.

At that time Faustine must have been at least twenty-eight, possibly thirty. There were matrons
who had not seen their fifteenth year, and Faustine had been married young. Her daughter, Lucille,
was nubile. Presently Verus, or rather his lieutenants, succeeded, and the girl was betrothed
to him. There was a festival, of course, games in abundance, and plenty of blood.

It would have been interesting to have seen her that day, the iron ring of betrothal on her
finger, her brother, Commodus, staring at the arrangement of her hair, her mother prettily
perplexed, her father signing orders which messengers brought and despatched while the sand
took on a deeper red, and Rome shrieked its delight. Yes, it would have been interesting and
typical of the hour. Her hair in the ten tresses which were symbolic of a fiancee's innocence,
must have amused that brute of a brother of hers, and the iron ring on the fourth finger of
her left hand must have given Faustine food for thought; the vestals, in their immaculate robes,
must have gazed at her in curious, sisterly ways, and because of her fresh beauty surely there
were undertones of applause. Should her father disappear she would make a gracious imperatrix
indeed.

But, meanwhile, there was Faustine, and at sight of her legends of old imperial days returned.
She was not Messalina yet, but in the stables there were jockeys whose sudden wealth surprised
no one; in the arenas there were gladiators that fought, not for liberty, nor for death, but
for the caresses of her eyes; in the side-scenes there were mimes who spoke of her; there were
senators who boasted in their cups, and in the theatre Rome laughed colossally at the catchword
of her amours.

Marcus Aurelius then was occupied with affairs of state. In similar circumstances so was Claud--Messalina's
husband--so, too, was Antonin. But Claud was an imbecile, Antonin a man of the world, while
Marcus Aurelius was a philosopher. When fate links a woman to any one of these varieties of
the husband, she is blessed indeed. Faustine was particularly favored.

The stately prince was not alone a philosopher--a calling, by the way, which was common enough
then, and has become commoner since--he was a philosopher who believed in philosophy, a rarity
then as now. The exact trend of his thought is difficult to define. His note-book is filled
with hesitations; materialism had its allurements, so also had pantheism; the advantages of
the Pyrrhonic suspension of judgment were clear to him too; according to the frame of mind
in which he wrote, you might fancy him an agnostic, again an akosmist, sometimes both, but
always the ethical result is the same.

"Revenge yourself on your enemy by not resembling him. Forgive; forgive always; die forgiving.
Be indulgent to the wrong-doer; be compassionate to him; tell him how he should act; speak
to him without anger, without sarcasm; speak to him affectionately. Besides, what do you know
of his wrong-doing? Are all his thoughts familiar to you? May there not be something that justifies
him? And you, are you entirely free from reproach? Have you never done wrong? And if not, was
it fear that restrained you? Was it pride, or what?"

In the synoptic gospels similar recommendations appear. Charity is the New Testament told in
a word. Christians read and forget it. But Christians are not philosophers. The latter are
charitable because they regard evil as a part of the universal order of things, one which it
is idle to blame, yet permissible to rectify.

