This appears to have
   been a deliberate act by the author, editor, or printer. These
   gaps are indicated in this version with [*gap] or [*large gap].]

SIXTEEN MONTHS IN FOUR GERMAN PRISONS

   WESEL
   SENNELAGER
   KLINGELPUTZ
   RUHLEBEN

Narrated by HENRY C. MAHONEY

Chronicled by FREDERICK A. TALBOT Author of "The New Garden of Canada," "Conquests of Science,"
Etc.

London and Edinburgh Sampson Low, Marston & Co., Ltd. 1917

  TO
  MY WIFE AND CHILDREN

  WHO WAITED PATIENTLY AND ANXIOUSLY
  FOR "DADDY," AND TO

  A FRIEND,

  STILL LANGUISHING IN RUHLEBEN, TO
  WHOM I OWE MY LIFE

PRISONER'S NOTE

It was whilst suffering the agonies of solitary confinement in the military prison of Wesel
that I first decided to record my experiences so that readers might be able to glean some idea
of the inner workings and the treatment meted out to our unfortunate compatriots who were travelling
in Germany at the outbreak of war and who have since been interned.

From the moment of my decision I gathered all the information possible, determining at the
first opportunity to escape to the Old Country. As will be seen I have to a degree been successful.

Owing to the grossly inaccurate and highly coloured reports which have been circulated from
time to time regarding the life and treatment of prisoners of war, the story has been set out
in a plain unvarnished form. There are no exaggerations whatever. Much of the most revolting
detail has been eliminated for the simple reason that they are unprintable.

In nearly every instance names have been suppressed. Only initials have been indicated, but
sufficient description is attached to enable personal friends of those who are still so unfortunate
as to be incarcerated to identify them and their present situation. Likewise, in the cases
where I received kind treatment from Germans, initials only have been introduced, since the
publication of their names would only serve to bring punishment upon them.

H.C.M.

CHRONICLER'S NOTE

On Friday afternoon, July 31, 1914, I shook hands in farewell with my friend Henry C. Mahoney.
He was going to Warsaw and was full of enthusiasm concerning the new task which was to occupy
him for at least three months. Owing to his exceptional skill and knowledge, practical as well
as theoretical, of photography in all its varied branches, he had been offered, and had accepted
an important appointment abroad in connection with this craft--one which made a profound appeal
to him. Despite the stormy outlook in the diplomatic world he felt convinced that he would
be able to squeeze through in the nick of time.

Although he promised to keep me well informed of his movements months passed in silence. Then
some ugly and ominous rumours came to hand to the effect that he had been arrested as a spy
in Germany, had been secretly tried and had been shot. I did not attach any credence to these
vague, wild stories. I knew he had never been to Germany before, and was au courant with the
harmless nature of his mission.

A year elapsed before I had any definite news. Then to my surprise I received a letter from
him dispatched from the Interned British Prisoners Camp at Ruhleben. As a matter of fact I
learned subsequently that he had previously written six letters and post-cards to me, but none
had reached me; most likely they had been intercepted and suppressed by the German authorities.

The letter intimated that he had prepared a voluminous account of his experiences. Two or three
days later I learned from another source that he had been "having a hard, rough, and exciting
time," and that he could relate one of the most fascinating and sensational stories concerning
the treatment meted out to our compatriots by the German authorities. I also learned that a
closely written diary and a mass of other papers were on their way to me; that they were in
safe keeping just over the frontier, the bearer waiting patiently for the most favourable moments
to smuggle them into safety. This diary and other documents contained material which he desired
me to make public with all speed in order to bring home to the British public a vivid impression
of what our fellow-countrymen were suffering in the German prison camps.

The papers never reached me. Why, is related in the following pages. In prosecuting discreet
enquiries to discover their whereabouts I learned, early in October 1915, that "Mahoney will
be home before Christmas." My informant declined to vouchsafe any further particulars beyond
the cryptic remark, "He's got something smart up his sleeve."

Knowing full well that my friend was a man of infinite resource and initiative I was not surprised
to learn a week or two later that "Ruhleben knew Mahoney no longer." He had got away. His plans
had proved so successful as to exceed the sanguine anticipations which he had formed.

On December 9, 1915, the day after his return to his wife and children, who had been keyed
up to the highest pitch of excitement by the welcome news, we met again. His appearance offered
convincing testimony as to the privations he had suffered, but I was completely surprised by
the terrible tale he unfolded.

When the story narrated in the following pages was submitted to the publishers they received
it with incredulity. After making enquiries concerning Mr. Mahoney's credentials they accepted
his statements as being accurate, but my friend, to set the matter beyond all dispute, insisted
upon making a statutory declaration as to their accuracy in every detail.

People in these islands were stirred to profound depths of horror by the cold-blooded murders
of Nurse Cavell and Captain Fryatt, of whose trials nothing was heard until the sentences had
been executed. A certain amount of curiosity has been aroused concerning the Teuton methods
of conducting these secret trials. Henry C. Mahoney passed through a similar experience, although
he escaped the extreme penalty. Still, the story of his trial will serve to bring home to the
public some idea of the manner in which Germany strives to pursue her campaign of frightfulness
behind closed doors.

  FREDERICK A. TALBOT.

CONTENTS

  PRISON ONE--WESEL

  CHAPTER                                                           PAGE

      I. ARRESTED AS A SPY                                            11

     II. COMMITTED TO WESEL PRISON                                    29

    III. HOW GERMANY DRIVES HER PRISONERS MAD                         44

     IV. MY SECRET MIDNIGHT TRIAL                                     60

      V. WAITING TO BE SHOT                                           74

  PRISON TWO--SENNELAGER

  THE BLACK HOLE OF GERMANY

     VI. OUR "LUXURIOUS HOTEL"                                        91

    VII. BREAKING US IN AT SENNELAGER                                105

   VIII. BADGERING THE BRITISH HEROES AT MONS                        119

     IX. THE PERSECUTION OF THE PRIESTS                              136

      X. TYING PRISONERS TO THE STAKE--THE FAVOURITE PUNISHMENT      148

     XI. THE REIGN OF TERROR                                         165

    XII. THE REIGN OF TERROR--CONTINUED                              180

   XIII. "THE BLOODY NIGHT OF SEPT. 11"                              196

    XIV. THE GUARDIAN OF THE CAMP                                    209

     XV. THE AFTERMATH OF THE 11TH                                   225

  PRISON THREE--KLINGELPUTZ

    XVI. FREE ON "PASS" IN COLOGNE                                   237

   XVII. RE-IMPRISONED AT KLINGELPUTZ                                253

  PRISON FOUR--RUHLEBEN

  XVIII. THE CAMP OF ABANDONED HOPE                                  266

    XIX. ORGANISING THE COMMUNAL CITY OF RUHLEBEN                    280

     XX. HOW I MADE MONEY IN RUHLEBEN CAMP                           301

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

  The Author as he appeared on the Day of his Release from Ruhleben
                                                         Frontispiece
                                                              FACE PAGE

  "The Bloody Night of September 11, 1914"                          198

  The Aftermath of the "Bloody Night"                               226

  Facsimile of the Pass issued by the German authorities to the
  Author on his leaving Sennelager for Cöln-on-Rhein                238

PRISON ONE--WESEL

CHAPTER I

ARRESTED AS A SPY

"Start August First. Book tickets immediately."

Such were the instructions I received at Brighton early in July, 1914, from Prince ----. A
few days previously I had spent considerable time with this scion of the Russian nobility discussing
the final arrangements concerning my departure to his palace in Russia, where I was to devote
two months to a special matter in which he was deeply interested, and which involved the use
of special and elaborate photographic apparatus, microscopes, optical lantern and other accessories.
I may mention that the mission in question was purely of scientific import.

During the discussion of these final arrangements a telegram was handed to the Prince. He scanned
it hurriedly, jumped up from his seat, and apologising for his abruptness, explained that he
had been suddenly called home. He expressed the hope that he would shortly see me in Russia,
where I was promised a fine time, but that he would instruct me the precise date when to start.
Meanwhile I was urged to complete my purchases of the paraphernalia which we had decided to
be imperative for our purpose, and he handed me sufficient funds to settle all the accounts
in connection therewith. That night the Prince bade me farewell and hurried off to catch the
boat train. My next communication from him was the brief instruction urging me to start on
August 1.[1]

    [Footnote 1: I have never heard since from the Prince. A day or
    two after the outbreak of war, upon joining the Russian forces,
    he, with an observer, ascended in an aeroplane--he was an
    enthusiastic and skilled aviator--to conduct a reconnaissance
    over the German lines. He was never seen nor heard of again.
    Searching enquiries have been made without result, and now it is
    presumed that he was lost or killed.--H.C.M.]

Shortly after his departure there were ominous political rumblings, but I, in common with the
great majority, concluded that the storm would blow over as it had done many times before.
Moreover, I was so pre-occupied with my coming task as to pay scanty attention to the political
barometer. I completed the purchase of the apparatuses, packed them securely, and arranged
for their dispatch to meet me at the train. Then I remained at home to await developments.
I was ready to start at a moment's notice, having secured my passport, on which I was described,
for want of a better term, as a "Tutor of Photography," and it was duly viséd by the Russian
Embassy.

Although the political sky grew more and more ominous I paid but little attention to the black
clouds. The receipt of instructions to start at once galvanised me into activity to the exclusion
of all other thoughts. I booked my passage right through to destination--Warsaw--and upon making
enquiries on July 31st was assured that I should get through all right.

I left Brighton by the 5.10 train on Saturday afternoon, August 1st. There was one incident
at the station which, although it appeared to be trivial, proved subsequently of far reaching
significance. In addition to many cameras of different types and sizes stowed in my baggage
I carried three small instruments in my pockets, one being particularly small. I had always
regarded this instrument with a strange affection because, though exceedingly small and slipping
into a tiny space, it was capable of excellent work. As the train was moving from the station
I took two parting snapshots of my wife and family waving me farewell. It was an insignificant
incident over which I merely smiled at the time, but five days later I had every cause to bless
those parting snaps. One often hears about life hanging by the proverbial thread, but not many
lives have hung upon two snapshot photographs of all that is dearest to one, and a few inches
of photographic film. Yet it was so in my case. But for those two tiny parting pictures and
the unexposed fraction of film I should have been propped against the wall of a German prison
to serve as a target for Prussian rifles!

Upon reaching Victoria I found the evening boat-train being awaited by a large crowd of enthusiastic
and war-fever stricken Germans anxious to get back to their homeland. The fiat had gone forth
that all Germans of military age were to return at once and they had rolled up en masse, many
accompanied by their wives, while there was a fair sprinkling of Russian ladies also bent upon
hurrying home. An hour before the train was due the platform was packed with a dense chattering,
gesticulating, singing, and dancing crowd. Many pictures have been painted of the British exodus
from Berlin upon the eve of war but few, if any, have ever been drawn of the wild stampede
from Britain to Berlin which it was my lot to experience.

As the train backed into the station there was a wild rush for seats. The excited Teutons grabbed
at handles--in fact at anything protruding from the carriages--in a desperate endeavour to
be first on the footboard. Many were carried struggling and kicking along the platform. Women
were bowled over pell-mell and their shrieks and cries mingled with the hoarse, exuberant howls
of the war-fever stricken maniacs already tasting the smell of powder and blood.

More by luck than judgment I obtained admission to a saloon carriage to find myself the only
Englishman among a hysterical crowd of forty Germans. They danced, whistled, sang and joked
as if bound on a wayzegoose. Badinage was exchanged freely with friends standing on the platform.
Anticipating that things would probably grow lively during the journey, I preserved a discreet
silence, and my presence was ignored.

The whistle blew, the locomotive screeched, and the next moment we were gliding out of the
station to the accompaniment of wild cheering, good wishes for a safe journey and speedy return,
and the strains of music which presently swelled into a roar about "Wacht am Rhein." The melody
was yelled out with such gusto and so repeatedly that I hoped I might ever be spared from hearing
its strains again. But at last Nature asserted herself. The throats of the singers grew hoarse
and tired, the song came to a welcome end, and music gave way to vigorous and keen discussion
upon the trend of events, which was maintained, not only during the train journey, but throughout
the cross-Channel passage to Flushing, which we reached at six o'clock the following morning.

At the Dutch port the wild excitement and hubbub broke out with increased virulence. The report
was circulated that the train now awaiting us would be the last through express to Berlin.
There was a frantic rush for seats. Men, women, and children participated in the wild mêlée.
The brutal shouts of the men contrasted vividly with the high-pitched adjurations of the women
and the wails and cries of the terrified children. Within a few minutes the train was packed
to suffocation, not an inch of standing-room being left, while the corridors were barricaded
with the overflow of baggage from the guards' vans.

For two hours we stood there scarcely able to breathe. The heat of the waxing summer's day
began to assert itself, with the result that it was not long before the women commenced to
show signs of distress. Their spirits revived, however, as the train commenced to move. There
was one solace--one and all were advancing towards home and the discomfort would not last for long.

So keen was the desire to get to Berlin that the great majority of the passengers had neglected
to provide themselves with any food, lest they should lose their seats or miss the train. But
they confidently expected that the train would pull up at some station to enable refreshments
to be obtained. They were supported in this belief by the withdrawal of the usual dining car
from the train. Those who trusted in luck, however, were rudely disappointed. The train refused
to stop at any station. Instead, it evinced a decided preference for intermediate signal posts.
It was described as an express, but a tortoise's crawl would be a gallop in comparison. It
travelled at only a little more than a walking pace and the stops were maddeningly frequent.

The women and children speedily betrayed painful evidences of the suffering they were experiencing,
which became accentuated as we advanced. The close confinement rendered the atmosphere within
the carriages extremely oppressive. The weaker men and the women commenced to faint but no
assistance could be extended to them. One could move barely an arm or leg. The afflicted passengers
simply went off where they were, sitting or standing, as the case might be, and prevented from
falling by the closely packed passengers around them, to come round as best they could when
Nature felt so disposed. The wails of the children were pitiful. Many were crying from cramp
and hunger, but nothing could be done to satisfy them, and indeed the men took little notice
of them.

The arrival--in time--at the frontier station at Goch somewhat revived the distressed and drooping.
Everyone seized the opportunity to stretch the limbs, to inhale some fresh air, and to obtain
some slight refreshment. The Customs officials were unusually alert, harrying, and inflexible.
There was the eternal wrangling between the passengers and the officials over articles liable
to duty and it was somewhat amusing to me, even with war beating the air, to follow the frantic
and useless efforts of old and experienced travellers to smuggle this, that, or something else
through the fiscal barrier.

The Customs were so far from being in a conciliatory mood as to be absolutely deaf to entreaty,
cajolery, argument, explanation or threat. They cut the operations summarily short by confiscating
everything liable to duty. As may be imagined a rich harvest was garnered at the expense of
the luckless returning patriot. While the Customs were busy the military officials, who appeared
to be swarming everywhere, were equally exacting. They boarded the train and literally turned
it inside out. Every man and woman and child was subjected to a close personal investigation
and cross-examination. Foreigners were handled with even greater stress and with less ceremony.
I saw four fellow passengers sorted out and rushed under a military escort into the waiting room.

At last it was my turn for military inquisition. I presented all my credentials, which were
scanned from end to end, turned over, and even held up to the light, lest there should be something
interwoven with the watermark. I followed the operations with a quiet amusement, confident
in my security, but could not resist remarking upon the thoroughness of the search and the
determination to leave nothing to chance. My passport created the greatest interest. It was
dated July 7th, 1914. The official looked at me queerly in silent interrogation as he placed
his finger beneath the date. I nodded and made no comment.

With a slight smile of self-satisfaction the officer turned on his heel and beckoned me to
follow him. At the same moment two soldiers clicked their heels behind me and I saw that I
was already under severe military suspicion. I was taken to a long-bearded individual sitting
in state on a pedestal. The officer handed to him the papers he had found upon me. There was
a hurried whispering, the superior individual eyeing me narrowly meanwhile. They compared the
date of the passport with August 2nd, Sunday, the day on which I was travelling, and also examined
the visé of the Russian Embassy in the corner.

Suddenly the long-bearded officer hurled a torrent of questions at me and at such a velocity
that I was quite unable to follow him. Observing that his volcanic interrogative eruption was
non-productive he slowed down and repeated the questions.

"Why are you travelling at this time?"

"To take up an appointment in Russia. There is the name--Prince ----"

"Ah!" and his eyebrows were elevated so much as to mingle almost with his hair.

"But why have you so much photographic apparatus?"

"It is necessary for the work I am taking up."

"Ah!" once again the eyebrows vanished scalp-wards.

"Have you a camera upon you?"

"No!"

"Ah!" another dance of the eyebrows.

He rapped out a short command and before I was aware of the circumstance two pairs of hands
were running rapidly over my body and in and out of my pockets with the dexterity of men who
had served a long apprenticeship under an Artful Dodger. It proved a blank search. I gave a
sigh of relief, because had the searchers run their hands over the lower part of my person
they would have come across two cameras, and my treasured little companion, wrapped in his
leather jacket, alert and ready for silent service, but concealed in a most unexpected corner.
I could scarcely repress a smile when I recognised that I was immune from further search. Evidently
the Pooh-bah was somewhat disconcerted at the negative results achieved, because, after firing
one or two other desultory questions at me, he handed back my passport and other papers, and
told me I could continue my journey.

Desiring to disarm suspicion completely I did not hurry away but lingered around the little
court and even indulged in a short idle conversation with my interlocutor, who, however, somewhat
resented my familiarity. I lounged back to the train, hugely delighted with myself, more particularly
as, quite unbeknown to the fussy individual with the beard, I had snapped a picture of his
informal court with my little camera.

The frontier formalities at last concluded, the train resumed its crawl, ambling leisurely
along for some two hours, stopping now and then to draw into a siding. On such occasions troop
train after troop train crowded with soldiers thundered by us en route to Berlin. The sight
of a troop train roused our passengers to frenzy. They cheered madly, throwing their hats into
the air. The huzzas were returned by the soldiers hanging out of the windows with all the exuberant
enthusiasm of school boys returning home at the end of the term.

But we were not destined to make a through run to the capital. Suddenly the train was pulled
up by a military guard upon the line. We were turned out pell-mell and our baggage was thrown
on to the embankment. This proceeding caused considerable uneasiness. What had happened? Where
were we going? and other questions of a similar character were hurled at the soldiers. But
they merely shook their heads in a non-committal manner. They either did not or would not know.
Our feelings were not improved when the empty carriages were backed down the line, the engine
changed ends, and we saw the train steam off in another direction. The hold-up of the train
had taken place at a depressing spot. We were completely stranded, without provisions or any
other necessities, and at an isolated spot where it was impossible to obtain any supplies.
The passengers pestered the guard for information, and at last the officers, to still any further
enquiry, declared that they were going to do something, to carry us "somewhere."

Some two-and-a-half hours slipped by when a loud cheer rang out at the appearance of a train
of crazy carriages which backed towards us. The passengers scrambled in and made themselves
as comfortable as they could. But where was the baggage to go? The soldiery had overlooked
this item and they surveyed the straggling mass of bags and trunks littering the embankment
ruefully. But they solved the problem in their own way. What could not be stacked within the
trucks would have to go on top.

We forged ahead once more to pull up at a small station. Here there was a mad scramble for
supplies and the refreshment room was soon cleared out of its small stock. On the platform
an extortionate German drove a brisk trade selling small bottles of lemonade at sixpence a
bottle. More excitement was caused by a newsvendor mounting a box and holding aloft a single
copy of the latest newspaper which he would sell to the highest bidder.

Being ignorant of what had transpired since I had left London I resolved to have that copy.
I scrambled over a pile of baggage and came within arm's length of the newsvendor. I threw
down coins to the value of 2s. 8d., grabbed his paper and vanished before he could voice a
protest. I scrambled back to my car. Here the paper was snatched from me to be read aloud to
the expectant crowd thirsting for news. There was a tense silence as the reader ran through
the items until he gravely announced the latest intelligence--Russia and Germany had declared
war. The news was official. For a second a profound silence reigned. Then there broke out a
further outburst of wild, maniacal cheering, above which, however, could be heard hysterical
screams and shrieks from women, especially from those bound for Russia, which they now realised
they would never reach.

I saw at once that it was hopeless to get to my destination, as the Russo-German frontier was
now closed. But as it was quite as impossible to turn back I decided to push on to Berlin there
to await events. So far Britain was not involved and might even keep clear of the tangle. This
I might say was the general opinion on the train. The remainder of the journey to the capital
was now far more exciting, and the animated conversation served to while away the tedium of
the slow travelling, although the latter part was completed in darkness, the train running
into Berlin at 1.30 in the morning of August 3rd, the journey from Flushing having taken about
18 hours.

The platform at Berlin was overrun with officials of all sorts and descriptions, ranging from
puny collectors to big burly fellows smothered with sufficient braid and decorations to pass
as field-marshals. But one and all seemed to be entrusted with swords too big for them which
clanked and clattered in the most nerve-racking manner. They strutted up and down the platform
with true Prussian arrogance, jostling the fatigued, cursing the helpless who lounged in their
path, ignoring the distress of the children, sneering at the pitiful pleadings of the women--in
fact caring about nothing beyond their own importance. They disdained to reply to any question,
and said nothing beyond the terse statement that no more trains were going East to Russia.
At this intelligence the travellers bound for the latter country collapsed, the majority, women,
flopping upon their baggage and dropping their heads in their hands in grief and utter despair.

Yet, although the authorities were fully aware that no more trains were going East they made
no attempt to cope with the influx of arriving and stranded passengers. They were left to their
own devices. The majority of the women and children were famished, thirsty, and tired, but
the officials resolutely refused to open the waiting rooms and buffets before the usual hour.
Accordingly the travel-tired, grief-stricken women either threw themselves prone upon the platforms,
or crawled into corridors, sub-ways, and corners to seek a little repose, using their luggage
as head-rests, or being content with the cold hard steps. The few seats upon the platform were
speedily occupied but the occupants were denied more than a brief repose. At the end of 15
minutes officials came round and emptied the seats of those in possession to allow other parties
to have a quarter of an hour's rest.

While the worn-out passengers slept the light-fingered German gentry passed swiftly from bag
to bag, the conditions offering favourable opportunities for the light-fingered gentry. They
appeared to suffer no molestation from the officials, who could plainly see what was going
on, but possibly officialdom regarded the belongings of tired and exhausted foreigners as legitimate
loot to those who were prepared to take it. Outside the station the heavier baggage was stacked
in barricades in a wildly haphazard manner with the heavier articles at the top. These, crushing
the lighter and more fragile packages beneath, spread the contents of the latter in the roadway
to serve as sport for gamins and other loungers who prowled around.

The utter chaos was aggravated by the rain which pelted down with torrential fury. Mothers
with their little children drew closely into corners or sat upon doorsteps seeking the slightest
shelter. As I turned out of the station my attention was attracted by a woman--she had come
up on our train--who was sitting on the kerb, her feet in the gutter, the rushing water coursing
over her ankles, feeding her child at the breast, and vainly striving to shelter the little
mite from the elements. The woman was crying bitterly. I went up to her. She spoke English
perfectly. She was Russian and had set out from England to meet her husband at Kalish. But
she could not get through, she had very little money, could not speak German, and knew not
what to do, or what would become of her. I soothed her as well as I could. There were hundreds
of similar cases around. Notwithstanding their terrible plight not a hand was moved by the
authorities on their behalf. They were even spurned and roughly moved out of the way by the
swaggering officials. It was not until the British colony got busy the next day that they received
the slightest alleviation, and the majority, being strangers in a strange land, were sent back
to England, the Germans mutely concurring in the task. The wild rush from the Continent may
have precipitated congestion at our ports and railway stations, but there never could have
been that absolute chaos which reigned at Berlin on the fateful night of the 2nd of August.
Humanity was thrown to the four winds. The much-vaunted Teuton organisation, system, and scientific
control had broken down completely under the first test to which it was subjected.

The terrific downpour caused me to decide to spend a few hours in the comfort of an hotel.
I hailed a taxi and jumped in. The car was just moving when the door was flung open, I was
grabbed by the coat-collar and the next moment found myself skating across the roadway on my
back. I jumped up, somewhat ruffled at this rude handling, to learn that it was an officer
who had treated me so unceremoniously. I had no redress. Berlin was under martial law. The
uniform of the military came before the mufti of the civilian.

Unable to find another vehicle I turned into the first place I found open. It was an all-night
café. It was packed to suffocation with German soldiers and the feminine underworld of Berlin.
There was a glorious orgy of drunkenness, nauseating and debasing amusement, and the incoherent
singing of patriotic songs. The other sex appeared to have thrown all discretion and womanliness
to the winds. A soldier too drunk to stand was assisted to a chair which he mounted with difficulty.
Here he was supported on either side by two flushed, hilariously-shouting, partially-dressed
harpies. He drew off his belt--his helmet had already gone somewhere--and pointing to the badge
he shouted thickly and coarsely, "Deutschland, Deutschland, Gott mit uns"--(Germany, Germany,
God is with us). Metaphorically he was correct, because the words are printed upon the belt
of every German soldier, but if the Almighty was with that drunken, debased crowd that night,
then Old Nick must have been wearing out his shoes looking for a job.

When the crowd caught sight of me, which was some time after my entrance because I had dropped
unseen into a convenient corner, they rushed forward and urged me to participate in their revels.
I declined. They had been hurling distinctly uncomplimentary and obscene epithets concerning
Britain through the room. My decision was construed into an affront to the All-Highest. A big,
burly, drunken soldier wanted to fight me. The crowd pressed round keenly anticipating some
fun. We indulged in a spirited altercation, but as neither understood what the other said,
words did not lead to blows. However, the upshot was the intimation that my room was preferred
to my company. This was received with enthusiasm, the result being that I made the sudden acquaintance
of the pavement outside once more, being assisted in my hurried departure by fisticuffs and
heavy boots.

I picked myself up and walked until I caught sight of an hotel. I entered, booked a room, and
indulged in an elaborate wash and brush-up of which I was sorely in need, following this with
a substantial breakfast. Then I sauntered into the vestibule for a smoke. Three German officers
and a squad of soldiers came clanking in. There was a short sharp order. One officer remained
at the door while the others disappeared into the depths of the building.

I went over to the officer and entered into conversation with him. He spoke English fluently
and was fairly affable. We discussed things in general and also the political situation, from
which I gathered that matters were rapidly approaching a climax, and that there was no telling
what would happen next. This was the first time I had been brought face to face with the situation
and my outlook was serious. The officer at last turned to me, and with a friendly smile, remarked--

"Look here, my English friend, I would advise you to make for your country at once. Don't stop
for anything!"

"Why?"

"Don't ask questions. Do as I say! Can't you take a friendly warning? Take to-day's train home!
If you don't--well, you may be detained!"

His advice was expressed in such significant tones that I looked at him sharply. He answered
with another smile and a shrug which intimated only too plainly that he had said as much as
he dared.

I was debarred from prosecuting the conversation farther by the return of his comrades with
a crowd of waiters. They were all Russians and they had been rounded up by the military. No
opportunity was given them to pack a few necessities. They were arrested at their tables, while
performing their duties, were corralled and now were off to prison. No one possessed any more
than he stood up in.

