It was the clapper-rail, the "marsh-hen." One never finds such a combination of long legs,
long toes, long neck and bill, with this long but heavy hen-like body, outside the meadows
and marshes. The grass ought to have been alive with the birds: it was breeding-time. But I
think the high tides must have delayed them or driven them elsewhere, for I did not find an
egg, nor hear at nightfall their colony-cry, so common at dusk and dawn in the marshes just
across on the coast about Townsend's Inlet. There at sunset in nesting-time one of the rails
will begin to call--a loud, clapping roll; a neighbor takes it up, then another and another,
the circle of cries widening and swelling until the whole marsh is a-clatter.

Heading my way with a slow, labored stroke came one of the fish-hawks. She was low down and
some distance away, so that I got behind a post before she saw me. The marsh-hen spied her
first, and dropped into the grass. On she came, her white breast and belly glistening, and
in her talons a big glistening fish. It was a magnificent catch. "Bravo!" I should have shouted--rather
I shouldn't; but here she was right over me, and the instinct of the boy, of the savage, had
me before I knew, and leaping out, I whirled my cap and yelled to wake the marsh. The startled
hawk jerked, keeled, lifted with a violent struggle, and let go her hold. Down fell the writhing,
twisting fish at my feet. It was a splendid striped bass, weighing at least four pounds, and
still live enough to flop.

I felt mean as I picked up the useless thing and looked far away to the great nest with its
hungry young. I was no better than the bald eagle, the lazy robber-baron, who had stolen the
dinner of these same young hawks the day before.

Their mother had been fishing up the river and had caught a tremendous eel. An eel can hold
out to wriggle a very long time. He has no vitals. Even with talon-tipped claws he is slippery
and more than a clawful; so the old hawk took a short cut home across the railroad-track and
the corner of the woods where stands the eagle tree.

She could barely clear the tree-tops, and, with the squirming of the eel about her legs, had
apparently forgotten that the eagle lived along this road, or else in her struggle to get the
prize home she was risking the old dragon's being away. He was not away. I have no doubt that
he had been watching her all the time from some high perch, and just as she reached the open
of the railroad-track, where the booty would not fall among the trees, he appeared. His first
call, mocking, threatening, commanding, shot the poor hawk through with terror. She screamed;
she tried to rise and escape; but without a second's parley the great king drove down upon
her. She dropped the fish, dived, and dodged the blow, and the robber, with a rushing swoop
that was glorious in its sweep, in its speed and ease, caught the eel within a wing's reach
of me and the track.

I did not know what to do with my spoil. Somewhat relieved, upon looking around, to find that
even the marsh-hen had not been an eye-witness to my knightly deed, I started with the fish
and my conscience toward the distant nest, determined to climb into it and leave the catch
with the helpless, dinnerless things for whom it was intended.

I am still carrying that fish. How seldom we are able to restore the bare exaction, to say
nothing of the fourfold! My tree was harder to climb than Zacchæus's. Mine was an ancient white
oak, with the nest set directly upon its dead top. I had stood within this very nest twelve
years before; but even with the help of my conscience I could not get into it now. Not that
I had grown older or larger. Twelve years do not count unless they carry one past forty. It
was the nest that had grown. Gazing up at it, I readily believed the old farmer in the Zane's
house who said it would take a pair of mules to haul it. He thought it larger than one that
blew down in the marsh the previous winter, which made three cart-loads.

One thinks of Stirling and of the castles frowning down upon the Rhine as he comes out of the
wide, flat marsh beneath this great nest, crowning this loftiest eminence in all the region.
But no château of the Alps, no beetling crag-lodged castle of the Rhine, can match the fish-hawk's
nest for sheer boldness and daring. Only the eagles' nests upon the fierce dizzy pinnacles
in the Yosemite surpass the home of the fish-hawk in unawed boldness. The aery of the Yosemite
eagle is the most sublimely defiant of things built by bird, or beast, or man.

A fish-hawk will make its nest upon the ground, or a hummock, a stump, a buoy, a chimney--upon
anything near the water that offers an adequate platform; but its choice is the dead top of
some lofty tree where the pathway for its wide wings is open and the vision range is free for
miles around.

How dare the bird rear such a pile upon so slight and towering a support! How dare she defy
the winds, which, loosened far out on the bay, come driving across the cowering, unresisting
marsh! She is too bold sometimes. I have known more than one nest to fall in a wild May gale.
Many a nest, built higher and wider year after year, while all the time its dead support has
been rotting and weakening, gets heavy with the wet of winter, and some night, under the weight
of an ice-storm, comes crashing to the earth.

Yet twelve years had gone since I scaled the walls and stood within this nest; and with patience
and hardihood enough I could have done it again this time, no doubt. I remember one nest along
Maurice River, perched so high above the gums of the swamp as to be visible from my home across
a mile of trees, that has stood a landmark for the oystermen this score of years.

The sensations of my climb into this fish-hawk's nest of the marsh are vivid even now. Going
up was comparatively easy. When I reached the forks holding the nest, I found I was under a
bulk of sticks and corn-stalks which was about the size of an ordinary haycock or an unusually
large wash-tub. By pulling out, pushing aside, and breaking off the sticks, I worked a precarious
way through the four feet or more of debris and scrambled over the edge. There were two eggs.
Taking them in my hands, so as not to crush them, I rose carefully to my feet.

Upright in a hawk's nest! Sixty feet in the air, on the top of a gaunt old white oak, high
above the highest leaf, with the screaming hawks about my head, with marsh and river and bay
lying far around! It was a moment of exultation; and the thrill of it has been transmitted
through the years. My body has been drawn to higher places since; but my soul has never quite
touched that altitude again, for I was a boy then.

Nor has it ever shot swifter, deeper into the abyss of mortal terror than followed with my
turning to descend. I looked down into empty air. Feet foremost I backed over the rim, clutching
the loose sticks and feeling for a foothold. They snapped with the least pressure; slipped
and fell if I pushed them, or stuck out into my clothing. Suddenly the sticks in my hands pulled
out, my feet broke through under me, and for an instant I hung at the side of the nest in the
air, impaled on a stub that caught my blouse as I slipped.

There is a special Providence busy with the boy.

This huge nest of the fish-hawks was more than a nest; it was a castle in very truth, in the
sheltering crevices of whose uneven walls a small community of purple grackles lived. Wedged
in among the protruding sticks was nest above nest, plastering the great pile over, making
it almost grassy with their loose flying ends. I remember that I counted more than twenty of
these crow-blacks' nests the time I climbed the tree, and that I destroyed several in breaking
my way up the face of the structure.

Do the blackbirds nest here for the protection afforded by the presence of the hawks? Do they
come for the crumbs which fall from these great people's table? Or is it the excellent opportunity
for social life offered by this convenient apartment-house that attracts?

The purple grackles are a garrulous, gossipy set, as every one knows. They are able-bodied,
not particularly fond of fish, and inclined to seek the neighborhood of man, rather than to
come out here away from him. They make very good American rooks. So I am led to think it is
their love of "neighboring" that brings them about the hawk's nest. If this surmise is correct,
then the presence of two families of English sparrows among them might account for there being
only eight nests now, where a decade ago there were twenty.

I was amused--no longer amazed--at finding the sparrows here. The seed of these birds shall
possess the earth. Is there even now a spot into which the bumptious, mannerless, ubiquitous
little pleb has not pushed himself? If you look for him in the rain-pipes of the Fifth Avenue
mansions, he is there; if you search for him in the middle of the wide, silent salt-marsh,
he is there; if you take--but it is vain to take the wings of the morning, or of anything else,
in the hope of flying to a spot where the stumpy little wings of the English sparrow have not
already carried him.

There is something really admirable in the unqualified sense of ownership, the absolute want
of diffidence, the abiding self-possession and coolness of these birds. One cannot measure
it in the city streets, where everybody jostles and stares. It can be appreciated only in the
marsh: here in the silence, the secrecy, the withdrawing, where even the formidable-looking
fiddler-crabs shy and sidle into their holes as you pass; here, where the sparrows may perch
upon the rim of a great hawk's nest, twist their necks, ogle you out of countenance, and demand
what business brought you to the marsh.

I hunted round for a stone when one of them buttonholed me. He wasn't insolent, but he was
impertinent. The two hawks and the blackbirds flew off as I came up; but the sparrows stayed.
They were the only ones in possession as I moved away; and they will be the only ones in possession
when I return. If that is next summer, then I shall find a colony of twenty sparrow families
around the hawk's nest. The purple grackles will be gone. And the fish-hawks? Only the question
of another year or so when they, too, shall be dispossessed and gone. But where will they go
to escape the sparrows?

III

From a mile away I turned to look back at the "cripple" where towered the tall white oak of
the hawks. Both birds were wheeling about the castle nest, their noble flight full of the freedom
of the marsh, their piercing cries voicing its wildness. And how free, how wild, how untouched
by human hands the wide plain seemed! Sea-like it lay about me, circled southward from east
to west with the rim of the sky.

I moved on toward the bay. The sun had dropped to the edge of the marsh, its level-lined shafts
splintering into golden fire against the curtained windows of the lighthouse. It would soon
be sunset. For some time there had been a quiet gurgling and lisping down in the grass, but
it had meant nothing, until, of a sudden, I heard the rush of a wave along the beach: the tide
was coming in. And with it came a breeze, a moving, briny, bay-cooled breeze that stirred the
grass with a whisper of night.

Once more I had worked round to the road. It ran on ahead of me, up a bushy dune, and forked,
one branch leading off to the lighthouse, the other straight out to the beach, out against
the white of the breaking waves.

The evening purple was deepening on the bay when I mounted the dune. Bands of pink and crimson
clouded the west, a thin cold wash of blue veiled the east; and overhead, bayward, landward,
everywhere, the misting and the shadowing of the twilight.

Between me and the white wave-bars at the end of the road gleamed a patch of silvery water--the
returning tide. As I watched, a silvery streamlet broke away and came running down the wheel
track. Another streamlet, lagging a little, ran shining down the other track, stopped, rose,
and creeping slowly to the middle of the road, spread into a second gleaming patch. They grew,
met--and the road for a hundred feet was covered with the bay.

As the crimson paled into smoky pearl, the blue changed green and gold, and big at the edge
of the marsh showed the rim of the moon.

Weird hour! Sunset, moonrise, flood-tide, and twilight together weaving the spell of the night
over the wide waking marsh. Mysterious, sinister almost, seemed the swift, stealthy creeping
of the tide. It was surrounding and crawling in upon me. Already it stood ankle-deep in the
road, and was reaching toward my knees, a warm thing, quick and moving. It slipped among the
grasses and into the holes of the crabs with a smothered bubbling; it disturbed the seaside
sparrows sleeping down in the sedge and kept them springing up to find new beds. How high would
it rise? Behind me on the road it had crawled to the foot of the dune. Would it let me through
to the mainland if I waited for the flood?

It would be high tide at nine o'clock. Finding a mound of sand on the shore that the water
could hardly cover, I sat down to watch the tide-miracle; for here, surely, I should see the
wonder worked, so wide was the open, so full, so frank the moon.

In the yellow light I could make out the line of sentinel trees across the marsh, and off on
the bay a ship, looming dim in the distance, coming on with wind and tide. There were no sounds
except the long regular wash of the waves, the stir of the breeze in the chafing sedges, and
the creepy stepping of the water weaving everywhere through the hidden paths of the grass.
Presently a night-hawk began to flit about me, then another and another, skimming just above
the marsh as silent as the shadows. What was that? Something moved across the moon. In a moment,
bat-like and huge against the great yellow disk, appeared a marsh-owl. He was coming to look
at me. What was I that dared remain abroad in the marsh after the rising of the moon? that
dared invade this eery realm, this night-spread, tide-crept, half-sealand where he was king?
How like a goblin he seemed! I thought of Grendel, and listened for the splash of the fen-monster's
steps along the edge of the bay. But only the owl came. Down, down, down he bobbed, till I
could almost feel the fanning of his wings. How silent! His long legs hung limp, his body dangled
between those soft wide wings within reach of my face. Yet I heard no sound. Mysterious creature!
I was glad when he ceased his ghostly dance about me and made off.

It was nine o'clock. The waves had ceased to wash against the sand, for the beach was gone;
the breeze had died away; the stir of the water in the grass was still. Only a ripple broke
now and then against my little island. The bay and the marsh were one.

    How still the plains of the waters be!
    The tide is in his ecstasy.
    The tide is at his highest height:
                And it is night.

CALICO AND THE KITTENS

CALICO AND THE KITTENS

One spring day I found myself the sole help of two blind, naked infants--as near a real predicament
as a man could well get. What did it matter that they had long tails and were squirrels? They
were infants just the same; and any kind of an infant on the hands of any mere man is a real
tragedy.

As I looked at the two callow things in the grass, a dismay and weak helplessness quite overcame
me. The way they squirmed and shivered and squeaked worked upon me down even to my knees. I
felt sick and foolish. Both of their parents were dead. Their loose leaf-nest overhead had
been riddled with shot. I had climbed up and found them; I had brought them down; I must--feed
them! The other way of escape were heathen.

But how could I feed them? Nipples, quills, spoons--none of them would fit these mites of mouths.
What a miserable mother I was! How poorly equipped for foundlings! They were dying for lack
of food; and as they pawed about and whimpered in my hands I devoutly wished the shot had put
them all out of misery together. I was tempted to turn heathen and despatch them.

Unhappy but resolute, I started homeward, determined to rear those squirrels, if it could be
done. On my way I remembered--and it came to me with a shock--that one of my neighbor's cats
had a new batch of kittens. They were only a few days old. Might not Calico, their mother,
be induced to adopt the squirrels!

Nothing could be more absurd. The kittens were three times larger than the squirrels. Even
had they been the same size, did I think the old three-colored cat could be fooled? that she
might not know a kitten of hers from some other mother's--squirrel? I was desperate indeed.
Calico was a hunter. She had eaten more gray squirrels, perhaps, than I had ever seen. She
would think I had been foraging for her--the mother of seven green kittens!--and would take
my charges as titbits. Still I was determined to try.

My neighbor's kittens were enough and to spare. One of Calico's last year's lot still waited
a good home; and here were seven more to be cared for. Might not two of these be spirited away,
far away; the two squirrels substituted, and the old cat be none the wiser?

I went home by way of my neighbor's, and found Calico in the basement curled up asleep with
her babies. She roused and purred questioningly as we bent over the basket, and watched with
concern, but with no anxiety, as two of her seven were lifted out and put inside a hat upon
a table. She was perfectly used to having her kittens handled. True, strange things had happened
to them. But that was long ago; and there had been so very many kittens that no one mother
could remember about them all. She trusted us--with an ear pricked and eyes watchful. But they
were safe, and in a prideful, self-conscious, young-mother way she began to wash the five.

Some one stood between her and the hat when the kittens were lifted out and the squirrels were
put in their place. Calico did not see. For a time she thought no more about them; she was
busy washing and showing the others. By and by it began to look as though she had forgotten
that there were more than five. She could not count. But most mothers can number their children,
even if they cannot count, and soon Calico began to fidget, looking up at the hat which the
hungry, motherless squirrels kept rocking. Then she leaped out upon the floor, purring, and
bounded upon the table, going straight to the young squirrels.

There certainly was an expression of surprise and mystification on her face as she saw the
change that had come over those kittens. They had shrunk and faded from two or three bright
colors to a single pale pink. She looked again and sniffed them. Their odor had changed, too.
She turned to the watchers about the table, but they said nothing. She hardly knew what to
think. She was half inclined to leave them and go back to the basket, when one of the squirrels
whimpered--a genuine, universal baby whimper. That settled it. She was a mother, and whatever
else these things in the hat might be, they were babies. That was enough, especially as she
needed just this much baby here in the hat to make good what was lacking in the basket.

With a soft, caressing purr she stepped gently into the hat, took one of the squirrels by the
neck, brought it to the edge of the table, and laid it down for a firmer hold; then sprang
lightly to the floor. Over to the basket she walked and dropped it tenderly among her other
babies. Then, having brought the remaining one and deposited that with the same mother-care,
she got into the basket herself and curled down contentedly--her heart all whole.

And this is how strange a thing mother-love is! The performance was scarcely believable. Could
she be so love-blind as not to see what they were and not eat them? But when she began to lick
the little interlopers and cuddle them down to their dinner as if they were her own genuine
kittens, there could be no more doubt or fear.

The squirrels do not know to this day that Calico is not their real mother. From the first
they took her mother's milk and mother's love as rightfully and thanklessly as the kittens,
growing, not like the kittens at all, but into the most normal of squirrels, round and fat
and splendid-tailed.

Calico clearly recognized some difference between the two kinds of kittens, but what difference
always puzzled her. She would clean up a kitten and comb it slick, then turn to one of the
squirrels and wash it, but rarely, if ever, completing the work because of some disconcerting
un-catlike antic. As the squirrels grew older they also grew friskier, and soon took the washing
as the signal for a frolic. As well try to wash a bubble. They were bundles of live springs,
twisting out of her paws, dancing over her back, leaping, kicking, tumbling as she had never
seen a kitten do in all her richly kittened experience.

I don't know why, but Calico was certainly fonder of these two freaks than of her own normal
children. Long after the latter were weaned she nursed and mothered the squirrels. I have frequently
seen them let into the kitchen when the old cat was there, and the moment they got through
the door they would rush toward her, dropping chestnuts or cookies by the way. She in turn
would hurry to meet them with a little purr of greeting full of joy and affection. They were
shamefully big for such doings. The kittens had quit it long ago. Calico herself, after a while,
came to feel the impropriety of mothering these strapping young ones, and in a weak, indulgent
way tried to stop it. But the squirrels were persistent and would not go about their business
at all with an ordinary cuff. She would put them off, run away from them, slap them, and make
believe to bite; but not until she did bite, and sharply too, would they be off. All this seemed
very strange and unnatural; yet a stranger thing happened one day, when Calico brought in to
her family a full-grown gray squirrel which she had caught in the woods. She laid it down on
the floor and called the kittens and squirrels to gather around. They came, and as the squirrels
sniffed at the dead one on the floor there was hardly a mark of difference in their appearance.
It might have been one of Calico's own nursing that lay there dead, so far as any one save
Calico could see. And with her the difference, I think, was more of smell than of sight. But
she knew her own; and though she often found her two out among the trees of the yard, she never
was mistaken, nor for an instant made as if to hurt them.

Yet they could not have been more entirely squirrel had their own squirrel mother nurtured
them. Calico's milk and love went all to cat in her own kittens, and all to squirrel in these
that she adopted. No single hair of theirs turned from its squirrel-gray to any one of Calico's
three colors; no single squirrel trait became the least bit catlike.

Indeed, as soon as the squirrels could run about they forsook the clumsy-footed kittens under
the stove and scampered up back of the hot-water tank, where they built a nest. Whenever Calico
entered the kitchen purring, out would pop their heads, and down they would come, understanding
the mother language as well as the kittens, and usually beating the kittens to the mother's side.

So far from teaching them to climb and build nests behind water-tanks, their foster-mother
never got over her astonishment at it. All they needed from her, all they needed and would
have received from their own squirrel mother, was nourishment and protection until their teeth
and legs grew strong. Wits were born with them; experience was sure to come to them; and with
wits and experience there is nothing known among squirrels of their kind that these two would
not learn for themselves.

And there was not much known to squirrels that these two did not know, apparently without even
learning. As they grew in size they increased exceedingly in naughtiness, and were banished
shortly from the kitchen to an ell or back woodshed. They celebrated this distinction by dropping
some hickory-nuts into a rubber boot hanging on the wall, and then gnawing a hole through the
toe of the boot in order to extract the hidden nuts. Was it mischief that led them to gnaw
through rather than go down the top? Or did something get stuffed into the top of the boot
after the nuts were dropped in? And did the squirrels remember that the nuts were in there,
or did they smell them through the rubber?

One woodshed is big enough only for two squirrels. The family moved everything out but the
wood, and the squirrels took possession for the winter. Their first nest had been built behind
the hot-water tank. They knew how to build without any teaching. But knowing how is not all
there is to know about building; knowing where is very important, and this they had to learn.

Immediately on coming to the woodshed the squirrels began their winter nest, a big, bulky,
newspaper affair, which they placed up in the northwest corner of the shed directly under the
shingles. Here they slept till late in the fall. This was the shaded side and the most exposed
corner of the whole house; but all went well until one night when the weather suddenly turned
very cold. A strong wind blew from the northwest hard upon the squirrels' nest.

The next day there was great activity in the woodshed--a scampering of lively feet, that began
early in the morning and continued far toward noon. The squirrels were moving. They gathered
up their newspaper nest and carried it--diagonally--across the shed from the shaded northwest
to the sunny southeast corner, where they rebuilt and slept snug throughout the winter.

Calico did not teach them this; neither would their own squirrel mother have taught them. They
knew how, to begin with. They knew where after one night of experience, which in this case
had to be a night of shivers.

THE SPARROW ROOST

THE SPARROW ROOST

An early December twilight was settling over Boston, a thick foggy murk that soaked down full
of smoke and smell and chill. The streets were oozy with a wet snow which had fallen through
the afternoon and had been trodden into mud; and draughty with an east wind, that would have
passed unnoticed across the open fields, but which drew up these narrow flues and sent a shiver
down one's back in spite of coats. It was half-past five. The stores were closing, their clerks
everywhere eddying into the noisy streams of wheels and hoofs still pouring up and down. The
traffic tide had turned, but had not yet ebbed away.

And this was evening! the coming night! I moved along with the crowd, homesick for the wideness
and quiet of the country, for the soughing of the pines, the distant bang of a barn door, the
night cry of guineas from some neighboring farm, when, in the hurry and din, I caught the cry
of bird voices, and looking up, found that I had stumbled upon a bird roost--at the very heart
of the city! I was in front of King's Chapel Burial Ground, whose half-dozen leafless trees
were alive with noisy sparrows.

The crowd swept on. I halted behind a waste-barrel by the iron fence and forgot the soughing
pines and clacking guineas.

Bird roosts of this size are no common find. I remember a huge fireplace chimney that stood
near my home, into which a cloud of swallows used to swarm for a few nights preceding the fall
migration; I lived some years close to the pines at the head of Cubby Hollow, where great flocks
of crows slept nightly throughout the winter; but these, besides now and again a temporary
resting-place, a mere caravansary along the route of the migrants, were all I had happened
upon. Here was another, bordering a city street, overhanging the street, with a blazing electric
light to get into bed by!

Protected by the barrel from the jostle on the sidewalk, I waited by the ancient graveyard
until the electric lights grew bright, until every fussing sparrow was quiet, until I could
see only little gray balls and blurs in the trees through the misty drizzle that came down
with the night. Then I turned toward my own snug roost, five flights up, next the roof, and
just a block away, as the sparrows fly, from this roost of theirs. I was glad to have them
so near me.

The windows of my roost look out over roofs of slate, painted tin, and tarry pebbles, into
a chimney-fenced plot of sky. Occasionally, during the winter, a herring-gull from the harbor
swims into this bit of smoky blue; frequently a pigeon, sometimes a flock, sails past; and
in the summer dusk, after the swallows quit it, a city-haunting night-hawk climbs out of the
forest of chimney-pots, up, up above the smoke for his booming roofward swoop. But winter and
summer, save along through June, the sparrows, as evening falls, cut across the sky field on
their way to the roost in the old burial-ground. There go two, there twoscore in a whirling,
scudding flurry, like a swift-blown bunch of autumn leaves. For more than an hour they keep
passing--till the dusk turns to darkness, till all are tucked away in bed.

One would scarcely recognize the birds as they sweep past in these flurries, their flight is
so unlike their usual clumsy scuttle as they get out of one's way along the street. They are
lumpish and short-winged on the street; they labor and lumber off with a sidewise twist to
their bodies that reminds one of a rheumatic old dog upon the trot. What suggestion of grace
or swiftness about them upon the ground? But watch them in their evening flight. It is a revelation.
They rise above the houses and shoot across my sky like a charge of canister. I can almost
hear them whizz. Down by the cemetery I have seen them dash into view high up in the slit of
sky, dive for the trees, dart zigzag like a madly plunging kite, and hurl themselves, as soft
as breaths, among the branches.

This is going to bed with a vengeance. I never saw any other birds get to roost with such velocity.
It is characteristic, however; the sparrow never does anything by halves. The hurry is not
caused by any mite of anxiety or fear, rather from pure excess of spirit; for after rearing
three broods during the summer, he has such a superabundance of vim that a winter of foraging
and fighting is welcome exercise. The strenuous life is his kind of life. When the day's hunt
is over and he turns back to his bed, why not race it out with his neighbors? And so they come--chasing,
dodging, tagging neck and neck, all spurting to finish first at the roost.

We may not love him; but he has constitution and snap. And these things do count.

One April morning, the 6th, I went down to the roost at three o'clock. The sparrows were sleeping
soundly. It was yet night. Had the dawn been reaching up above the dark walls that shut the
east away from the high tree-tops, the garish street light would have kept it dim. The trees
were silent and stirless, as quiet as the graves beneath them--more quiet; in fact; for there
issued from a grated hole among the tombs the sound of an anvil, deep down and muffled, but
unmistakably ringing, as if Governor Winthrop were forging chains in his vault. Then came a
rush, a deadened roar, and an emanation of dank gaseous breath, such as the dead alone breathe.

It was only the passing of a tool-car in the subway underneath the cemetery, and the hammering
of a workman at a forge in a niche of the tunnel. But, rising out of the tombs, it was gruesome
and unearthly in the night-quiet.

The sparrows did not mind the sound. Maybe it ascended as a pleasant murmur to them and shaped
their dreams, as dream-stuff drifts to their sweet-voiced cousins in the meadows with the lap
and lave of the streams. A carriage rolled by. The clank of hoofs disturbed none of them. Some
one slammed the door of an apothecary-shop across the street, and hurried off. Not a sparrow
stirred.

I was trying to see whether the birds slept with their heads beneath their wings. Apparently
they did, for I could not make out a head, though some of the sleepers hung over the street
within ten feet of the lamp-post. But they were all above the light, with only their breasts
out of the shadows, and to be certain I must make a bird move. Finding that the noises were
not likely to arouse them, I threw a stick against one of the laden limbs. There were heads
then, plenty of them, and every one, evidently, had been turned back and buried in the warm
wing-coverts.

My stick hit very near the toes of one of the sparrows, and he flew. There was a twitter, then
a stir all over the tree; but nothing further happening, they tucked in their heads again and
went back to bed.

I waited. At four o'clock they still slept. The moon had swung out from behind the high buildings
and now hung just above the slender spire of Park Street Church, looking down into the deep,
narrow street gulch. A cat picked her way among the graves, sprang noiselessly to the top of
a flat tomb beneath the sparrows, and watched with me. The creature brought the wilderness
with her. After all, this was not so far removed from the woods. In the empty street, beneath
the silent, shuttered walls, with something still of the mystery of the night winds in the
bare trees, the scene, for an instant, was touched with the spell of the dark and the untamed.

After a swift warming walk of fifteen minutes I returned to the roost. There were signs of
waking now: a flutter here, a twitter there, then quiet again, with no general movement until
half-past four, when the city lights were shut off. Then, instantly, from a dozen branches
sounded loud, clear chirps, and every sparrow opened his eyes. The incandescent bulbs about
the border of the roost were moon and stars to them, lights in the firmament of their heaven
to divide the night from the day. When they blazed forth, it was evening--bedtime; when they
went out, it was morning--the time to wake up.

The softness of dusk, how unknown to these city dwellers! and the fresh sweet beauty of the dawn!

Morning must have begun to break along near four o'clock, for the cold gray across the sky
was already passing into pearl. The country birds had been up half an hour, I am sure. However,
the old cemetery was wide enough awake now. There was chirping everywhere. It grew louder and
more general every moment, till shortly the six thousand voices, and more, were raised in the
cheerful din--the matin, if you please, for as yet only a few of the birds were fighting.

But the fight quickly spread. It is the English sparrow's way of waking up; his way of whetting
his appetite for breakfast; his way of digesting his dinner; his way of settling his supper--his
normal waking way.

