Mrs. T----, aged 56 years, of an excessively corpulent habit, had been affected for a great
number of years with a scirrhus of the right breast. Finding her health decline, she at last
disclosed it, and in coincidence with the opinion of Dr. WARREN, sen. I amputated it on the
30th of May, of the present year. We however informed her friends, that the probability of
eradicating the disease was extremely small. The skin was in many places hardened and drawn
in, and in others discoloured, and ulcerated at the nipple, so that it was found necessary
to remove, not only what covered the breast, but some portion of that which surrounded it.
A long chain of diseased glands, extending quite to the axillary vessels, was also extirpated.
She bore the operation well, lost no great quantity of blood, and recovered her appetite and
strength surprisingly in a few days, while the wound healed rapidly. At the end of twenty days
a difficulty of breathing commenced, and soon became so oppressive, that she could no longer
lie in bed; partly, no doubt, on account of her extraordinary obesity. The pulse was small,
quick, and commonly feeble, but sometimes a little hard, when any degree of fever was present.
The countenance became pale, the lips of a leaden hue, the eyes dim. We were surprised at the
change, and conjectured that the cancerous action had suddenly extended to the lungs. Yet she
had not the slightest cough; and it was remarked by Dr. WARREN, sen. that he had never observed
that diseased action to increase, while the wound remained open. At last the lower extremities
swelled, which might be attributed to the upright posture, and the pressure on the absorbent
vessels in that posture. The appetite failed; she complained of a constant sense of depression
at the stomach, and, without any remission of the difficulty of breathing, died on the 1st of July.

On the next morning the body was examined. The pleura in both cavities of the thorax was studded
with small, white, and apparently homogeneous tubercles; the lungs contained a great number
of similar bodies. The right cavity of the pleura was entirely filled with water, of which
we removed at least three quarts. The heart was of the usual size, very flaccid and tender;
but not otherwise disordered. The liver was enlarged, of its usual colour, much hardened, and
had on its surface, and in its substance, many tubercles like those in the thorax. It had also
a great number of encysted cavities, each about the size of a hazle nut, which contained a
thin yellow fluid. The gall bladder was wanting, and in its place there was a small, but very
remarkable depression, without a vestige of any former gall bladder, for the coat of the liver
was as smooth and perfect there as in any other part[15]. The pancreas was in a scirrhous state.
The abdomen did not contain any water.

    [Footnote 15: See Soemmerring de corporis humani fabrica,
    vol. 6, pag. 188 and Baillie’s morbid anatomy, pag. 248.]

It seems, then, that water may exist in the cavity of the thorax, without any remarkable symptoms,
except dyspnœa and difficulty in assuming the horizontal posture. But in organic diseases of
the heart, there is a long train of frightful symptoms, distinguishable by the most superficial
observers. We infer that these disorders have been unnecessarily confounded.