The beneficial influences of the institution of African slavery were not only apparent in the
independent and honorable bearing and conduct of the Southern people, growing from the habit
of command, and involuntary contrast of condition, but upon the material advancement and progress
of the country. The product of slave labor, when directed by a higher intelligence than his
own, is enormous, and was the basis of the extended and wealth-creating commerce of the entire
country. These products could be obtained in no other manner, and without this labor, are lost
to the world. The African negro, in osseous and muscular developments, and in all the essentials
for labor, is quite equal to those of the white race; in his cerebral, greatly inferior. The
capacities of his brain are limited and incapable of cultivation beyond a certain point. His
moral man is as feeble and unteachable as his mental. He cannot be educated to the capacity
of self-government, nor to the formation and conducting of civil government to the extent of
humanizing and controlling by salutary laws a people aggregated into communities. He learns
by example which he imitates, so long as the exampler is present before him; but this imitation
never hardens to fixed views or habits, indicating the design of Providence, that these physical
capacities should be directed and appropriated for good, by an intelligence beyond the mental
reach of the negro.

Why is this so? In the wisdom and economy of creation every created thing represents a design
for a use. The soil and climate of the tropical and semi-tropical regions of the earth produce
and mature all, or very nearly all of the necessaries and luxuries of human life. But human
beings of different races and different capacities fill up the whole earth. The capacity to
build a fire and fabricate clothing is given only to man. Was the element of fire and the material
for clothing given for any but man's use? This enables him to inhabit every clime. But the
capacity to produce all the necessaries and luxuries of life is given only to a certain portion
of the earth's surface; and its peculiar motions give the fructifying influences of the sun
only to the middle belt of the planet. The use of this organization is evidenced in the production
of this belt, and these productions must be the result of intelligently directed labor.

The peculiarity of the physical organization of the white man makes it impossible for him to
labor healthfully and efficiently for the greatest development of this favored region. Yet
his wants demand the yield and tribute of this region. His inventive capacity evolved sugar
from the wild canes of the tropics, than which nothing is more essential to his necessities,
save the cereals and clothing. He fabricated clothing from the tropical grass and tropical
cotton, found the uses of cassia, pimento, the dye woods, and the thousand other tropical products
which contribute to comfort, necessity, and luxury; advancing human happiness, human progress,
and human civilization.

The black man's organization is radically different. He was formed especially to live and labor
in these tropical and semi-tropical regions of the earth; but he is naturally indolent, his
wants are few, and nature unaided supplies them. He is uninventive, and has always, from creation
down, lived amid these plants without the genius to discover, or the skill and industry to
develope their uses. That they are used, and contribute to human health and human necessities,
is abundant evidence of Divine design in their creation.

The black man's labor, then, and the white man's intelligence are necessary to the production
and fabrication, for human use, of these provisions of Providence. This labor the black man
will not yield without compulsion. He is eminently useful under this compulsion, and eminently
useless, even to himself, without it. That he was designed to obey this authority, and to be
most happy when and where he was most useful, is apparent in his mental and moral organization.
By moral I mean those functions of the nervous system which bring us in relation with the external
world. He aspires to nothing but the gratification of his passions, and the indulgence of his
indolence. He only feels the oppression of slavery in being compelled to work, and none of
the moral degradation incident to servility in the higher or superior races. He is, consequently,
more happy, and better contented in this, than in any other condition of life. His morals,
his bodily comforts, and his status as a man, attain to an elevation in this condition known
to his race in no other.

All the results of his condition react upon the superior race, holding him in the condition
designed for him by his Creator, producing results to human progress all over the world, known
to result in an equal ratio from no other cause. The institution has passed away, and very
soon all its consequences will cease to be visible in the character of the Southern people.
The plantation will dwindle to the truck-patch, the planter will sink into the grave, and his
offspring will degenerate into hucksters and petty traders, and become as mean and contemptible
as the Puritan Yankee.

In the two hundred years of African slavery the world's progress was greater in the arts and
sciences, and in all the appliances promotive of intelligence and human happiness, than in
any period of historical time, of five centuries. Why? Because the labor was performed by the
man formed for labor and incapable of thinking, and releasing the man formed to think, direct,
and invent, from labor, other than labor of thought. This influence was felt over the civilized
world. The productions of the tropics were demanded by the higher civilization. Men forgot
to clothe themselves in skins when they could do so in cloth. As commerce extended her flight,
bearing these rich creations of labor, elaborated by intelligence, civilization went with her,
expanding the mind, enlarging the wants, and prompting progress in all with whom she communicated.
Its influence was first felt from the Antilles, extending to the United States. In proportion
to the increase of these products was the increase of commerce, wealth, intelligence, and power.
Compare the statistics of production by slave-labor with the increase of commerce, and they
go hand in hand. As the slave came down from the grain-growing region to the cotton and sugar
region, the amount of his labor's product entering into commerce increased four-fold. The inventions
of Whitney and Arkwright cheapened the fabric of cotton so much as to bring it within the reach
of the poorest, and availed the world in all the uses of cloth. 

He himself used to act as their postman. Perhaps it is misleading to say that Welcombe is only
three miles from Morwenstow; visitors who try to find their way through the rambling narrow
lanes will find it much nearer to five or six. But the loveliness of Marsland vale is a recompense,
and a charming introduction to the beauties of North Devon.

On the Cornish side of Marsland-mouth is a secluded old farmhouse,
which Hawker solemnly averred was haunted.

It was once truly haunted by smugglers. Mr. Baring-Gould introduces it into his novel, The
Gaverocks. Hawker once said to a visitor, "You must go and look at the old house there--there
is a very curious old lady there you may see--come into my study and I will show you her picture--she
died, at least her body did, some sixty years ago. I frequently see her and talk with her."
This spot must not be quitted without recalling that Marsland-mouth is the home of Lucy Passmore,
the white witch in Westward Ho! It was hither that Rose Salterne came to perform the love-charm
that should reveal her lover. It can hardly be said that such superstitions have yet died
out of the West Country, but it is the older people now that cherish these ideas, secretly and furtively.
The youngsters are being taught differently in the Council Schools.

There are some fine headlands in this part of the coast, such as the two Sharpnose Points, but
the finest of all is Hennacliff, which rises to about 450 feet, and drops sheer into the Atlantic
waves. Even where there is a beach beneath these rugged cliffs, it is usually difficult to
reach; in many parts the breakers dash full against the granite precipices, and there are often
outlying reefs of cruel jagged crag. Noting the deadly features of the coast, we can understand
how even Bude attained its name of Haven, however bitterly ironic that name may often have
sounded.

But it is a grand coast and mainland confronting the wild, unresting sea, and the traditional
atmosphere of the district is wholly in keeping with its physical features. Rumours of bygone
peoples float around us--of Saxon and Celt and of earlier people still; the legends that they
fostered are repeated to us, the footsteps of old saints may be traced, together with secular records
of pirate and smuggler. There are memories of glorious and gracious personages, as well as of
those whose villainy at least was picturesque; there are sad memorials of shipwreck, death, and
heartbreak. There are stretches of undulating upland, with fragrant turf, gorse, bracken; valleys
almost too low for sunlight to enter, the wild and tortuous mouths of rapid streams, patches of meadow
and pasture, with lonely cottages and isolated church-towns. Different from the southern coast
in aspect, more desolate, less fertile, there is yet a special charm
even in the desolation, a stimulating appeal in the solitude, and
a marvellous purity in the bracing winds that blow, sometimes with
ruthless violence, from a thousand leagues of ocean. The fertility of the soil is such that these crops
are immensely heavy; and when the cotton-plant has matured its fruit, and the pent-up lint
in the large conical balls has burst them open, exposing their white treasure swelling out
to meet the sun's warm rays, and the parent stock to the first frost of autumn has thrown off
her foliage, and all these broad fields are one sheet of lovely white, as far as the eye can
view--the scene is lovely beyond description; and when the same rich scene was presented extending
along the banks of the great river, with the magnificent steamers resting at the wharf below,
and others cleaving the current in proud defiance of the mighty volume of hurrying waters--the
splendor and magnificence of the whole sublimated the feelings as we viewed it in wonder.

The river, the bluff, and the lake are there; but waste and desolation frown on these, and
the fat earth's rich fruits are yielded no more. Fanaticism's hot breath has breathed upon
it, and war's red hand (her legitimate offspring) has stricken down the laborer; tillage has
ceased, and gaunt poverty and hungry want only are left in her train.

When the great La Salle moored his little fleet at the foot of this bluff, ascended to its
summit, and looked over this then forest-clad plain, did he contemplate the coming future of
this beautiful discovery of his genius and enterprise? When he looked upon the blue smoke curling
above the tall tree-tops along the lake, in the far distance, as it ascended from the wigwams
of the Natchez, the wild denizens of this interminable forest, did his prophetic eye perceive
these lovely fields, happy homes, and prosperous people, who came after him to make an Eden
of this chosen spot of all the earth? and did it stretch on to contemplate the ruin and desolation
which overspreads it now? How blest is man that he sees not beyond to-day!

Here he first met the Natchez, and viewed with wonder the flat heads and soft, gazelle eyes
of this strange people. They welcomed his coming, and tendered him and his people a home. From
them he learned the extent of the great river below, and that it was lost in the great water
that was without limit and had no end. These Indians, according to their traditions, had once
inhabited, as a mighty nation, the country extending from near the city of Mexico to the Rio
Grande, and were subjects of the Aztec empire of Mexico. They had been persecuted and oppressed,
and determined, in grand council, to abandon the country and seek a home beyond the Mizezibbee,
or Parent-of-many-waters, which the word signifies.

Their exodus commenced in a body. They were many days in assembling upon the east bank of the
Rio Grande; and thence commenced their long march. They abandoned their homes and the graves
of their ancestors for a new one in the lovely region they found on the hills extending from
the mouth of the Yazoo to Baton Rouge. Their principal town and seat of empire was located
eleven miles below Natchez, on the banks of Second Creek, two miles from the Mississippi River.
It is a delightful spot of high table-land, with a small strip of level low-land immediately
upon the margin of the dimpling little stream of sweet water. Upon this flat they erected the
great mound for their temple of the Sun, and the depository of the holy fire, so sacred in
their worship. At each point of the compass they erected smaller mounds for the residences
of their chief, or child of the Sun, and his ministers of state. In the great temple upon the
principal mound they deposited the fire of holiness, which they had borne unextinguished from
the deserted temple in Mexico, and began to build their village. Parties went forth to establish
other villages, and before a great while they were located in happy homes in a land of abundance.
They formed treaties of amity with their powerful but peaceable neighbors, the Choctaws, and
ere long with the Chickasaws and other minor tribes, east, and below them, on the river, the
Tunicas, Houmas, and others; for the country abounded with little bands, insignificant and
powerless.

These Indians revered, as more than mortal, their great chief, whom they called the child of
the Sun. They had a tradition that when they were a great nation, in Mexico, they were divided
into parties by feuds among their chiefs, and all their power to resist the aggressions of
their enemies was lost; consequently they had fallen under the power of the Aztecs, who dominated
them, and destroyed many of their people. Upon one occasion, when a common enemy and a common
suffering had made them forget their quarrels, they were assembled for council. Suddenly there
appeared in their midst a white man and woman, surrounded with a halo of light coming directly
from the sun. They were all silent with awe when this man spoke, and with such authority as
to make every chief tremble with fear. They bowed to him with reverence, and he professing
to be weary with his long journey, they conducted him with his wife to a lodge, and bade them
repose and be rested. The chiefs, in the darkness of the night and in silence, assembled, while
the celestial pair slept, conscious of security. After long and close council, they determined
to proffer the supreme authority of the nation to this man, sent to them by the sun. When this
determination had been reached, the chiefs, in a body, repaired to the house occupied by their
mysterious visitors and, arousing them from sleep, they formally tendered to the man the crown
and supreme authority over the chiefs, all their villages, and all their people. At first he
refused, asserting that he knew their hearts; they carried hatred of one another, and that
they would come to hate him; then they would disobey him, and this would be death to all the
Natchez. Finally yielding to the importunities and earnestly repeated protestations of a determination
to obey him and follow his counsels implicitly, he agreed to accept the crown upon certain
conditions. These were: first and paramount, that the Natchez should abandon their homes and
country, and follow him to a new home which he would show them; and that they should live and
conform strictly to the laws he would establish. The principal of these were: the sovereign
of Natchez should always and forever be of his race, and that if he had sons and daughters,
they should not be permitted to intermarry with each other, but only with the people of the
Natchez. The first-born of his sons should be his successor, and then the son of his eldest
daughter, and should he have no daughter, then the son of his eldest sister, or in default
of such an heir, then the eldest son of the nearest female relative of the sovereign, and so
in perpetuity.

So soon as he was inaugurated chief and supreme ruler, he went out in the midst of the assembled
multitude and called down in their presence fire from the sun; blessed it and made it holy.
He created a guard of eight men, made them priests and gave them charge of the fire, and bid
them, under pain of death, to preserve and keep alive this holy fire. They must tend it day
and night and feed it with walnut wood, and in their charge it went before the moving host
to where he had promised they should find a new and better home than the one they were leaving.

Another tradition says, they were aiders of the Spaniards in the conquest of Mexico, and that
these became as great persecutors of their people as the Aztecs. But from many of their traditions
connected with their new home which extended back far beyond the conquest of Mexico, it is
thought by historians that this tradition alludes to some other war in which they took part
against their oppressors. They were remarkable for their size and symmetry of form of their
men; but like all the race, they made slaves of their women, imposing every burden from the
cultivation of their fields to the duties of the household--the carrying of heavy burdens and
the securing of fuel for winter. "Ah, we did that," sighed out the elderly workman, "because we were
too backward to attempt anything better. We were not clever people
like you!

We couldn't play the piano, and paint and swim, and go in for chemistry. We were not clever
enough, and had to put up with passing a very low standard."

"Thank your lucky stars it was so," exclaimed the chemist, with tears in his eyes, "for your
fate is happier than ours. We are all fifth-rate, and can do nothing else. We have no chance
against those who have been born to this kind of thing, and we have
forgotten how to do your work. So we are starving, and--"

But here
the old man was interrupted by a policeman, who ordered all of them
to move on. And on they moved. Half one way and half the other. But when the marriage was agreeable to the families of both
parties and was consequently determined upon, the head of the family of the bride went with
her and her whole family to the house of the bridegroom, who there stood with all his family
around him, when the old man of the bridegroom's family welcomed them, by asking: "Is it thou?"
"Yes," answered the other ancient. "Sit down," continued the other. Immediately all were seated,
and a profound silence for many minutes ensued. Then the eldest man of the party bid the groom
and bride to stand up, when he addressed them in a speech in which he recapitulated all the
duties of man and wife; informed them of the obligations they were assuming, and then concluded
with a lecture of advice as to their future lives.

