THE COMING OF CUCULAIN

BY

STANDISH O'GRADY

Author of

"THE TRIUMPH AND PASSING OF CUCULAIN"

"IN THE GATES OF THE NORTH"

"THE FLIGHT OF THE EAGLE"

ETC.

PREFACE

There are three great cycles of Gaelic literature. The first treats of the gods; the second
of the Red Branch Knights of Ulster and their contemporaries; the third is the so-called Ossianic.
Of the Ossianic, Finn is the chief character; of the Red Branch cycle, Cuculain, the hero of
our tale.

Cuculain and his friends are historical characters, seen as it were through mists of love and
wonder, whom men could not forget, but for centuries continued to celebrate in countless songs
and stories. They were not literary phantoms, but actual existences; imaginary and fictitious
characters, mere creatures of idle fancy, do not live and flourish so in the world's memory.
And as to the gigantic stature and superhuman prowess and achievements of those antique heroes,
it must not be forgotten that all art magnifies, as if in obedience to some strong law; and
so, even in our own times, Grattan, where he stands in artistic bronze, is twice as great as
the real Grattan thundering in the Senate. I will therefore ask the reader, remembering the
large manner of the antique literature from which our tale is drawn, to forget for a while
that there is such a thing as scientific history, to give his imagination a holiday, and follow
with kindly interest the singular story of the boyhood of Cuculain, "battle-prop of the valour
and torch of the chivalry of the Ultonians."

I have endeavoured so to tell the story as to give a general idea of the cycle, and of primitive
heroic Irish life as reflected in that literature, laying the cycle, so far as accessible,
under contribution to furnish forth the tale. Within a short compass I would bring before swift
modern readers the more striking aspects of a literature so vast and archaic as to repel all
but students.

THE COMING OF CUCULAIN

CHAPTER I

THE RED BRANCH

     "There were giants in the earth in those days, the same
     were mighty men which were of yore men of renown."

The Red Branch feasted one night in their great hall at Emain Macha. So vast was the hall that
a man, such as men are now, standing in the centre and shouting his loudest, would not be heard
at the circumference, yet the low laughter of the King sitting at one end was clearly audible
to those who sat around the Champion at the other. The sons of Dithorba made it, giants of
the elder time, labouring there under the brazen shoutings of Macha and the roar of her sounding
thongs. Its length was a mile and nine furlongs and a cubit. With her brooch pin she ploughed
its outline upon the plain, and its breadth was not much less. Trees such as the earth nourished
then upheld the massy roof beneath which feasted that heroic brood, the great-hearted children
of Rury, huge offspring of the gods and giants of the dawn of time. For mighty exceedingly
were these men. At the noise of them running to battle all Ireland shook, and the illimitable
Lir [Footnote: Lir was the sea-god, the Oceanns of the Celt; no doubt the same as the British
Lear, the wild, white-headed old king, who had such singular daughters; two, monsters of cruelty,
and one, exquisitely sweet, kind, and serene, viz.: Storm, Hurricane, and Calm.] trembled in
his watery halls; the roar of their brazen chariots reverberated from the solid canopy of heaven,
and their war-steeds drank rivers dry.

A vast murmur rose from the assembly, for like distant thunder or the far-off murmuring of
agitated waters was the continuous hum of their blended conversation and laughter, while, ever
and anon, cleaving the many-tongued confusion, uprose friendly voices, clearer and stronger
than battle-trumpets, when one hero challenged another to drink, wishing him victory and success,
and his words rang round the hollow dome. Innumerable candles, tall as spears, illuminated
the scene. The eyes of the heroes sparkled, and their faces, white and ruddy, beamed with festal
mirth and mutual affection. Their yellow hair shone. Their banqueting attire, white and scarlet,
glowed against the outer gloom. Their round brooches and mantle-pins of gold, or silver, or
golden bronze, their drinking vessels and instruments of festivity, flashed and glittered in
the light. They rejoiced in their glory and their might, and in the inviolable amity in which
they were knit together, a host of comrades, a knot of heroic valour and affection which no
strength or cunning, and no power, seen or unseen, could ever relax or untie.

At one extremity of the vast hall, upon a raised seat, sat their young king, Concobar Mac Nessa,
slender, handsome, and upright. A canopy of bronze, round as the bent sling of the Sun-god,
the long-handed, far-shooting son of Ethlend, [Footnote: This was the god Lu Lam-fada, i.e.,
Lu, the Long-Handed. The rainbow was his sling. Remember that the rod sling, familiar enough
now to Irish boys, was the weapon of the ancient Irish, and not the sling which is made of
two cords.] encircled his head. At his right hand lay a staff of silver. Far away at the other
end of the hall, on a raised seat, sat the Champion Fergus Mac Roy, like a colossus. The stars
and clouds of night were round his head and shoulders seen through the wide and high entrance
of the dun, whose doors no man had ever seen closed and barred. Aloft, suspended from the dim
rafters, hung the naked forms of great men clear against the dark dome, having the cords of
their slaughter around their necks and their white limbs splashed with blood. Kings were they
who had murmured against the sovereignty of the Red Branch. Through the wide doorway out of
the night flew a huge bird, black and grey, unseen, and soaring upwards sat upon the rafters,
its eyes like burning fire. It was the Mor-Reega, [Footnote: There were three war goddesses:--(1)
Badb (pronounced Byve); (2) Macha, already referred to; (3) The Mor-Rigu or Mor-Reega, who
wag the greatest of the three.] or Great Queen, the far-striding terrible daughter of Iarnmas
(Iron-Death). Her voice was like the shouting of ten thousand men. Dear to her were these heroes.
More she rejoiced in them feasting than in the battle-prowess of the rest.

When supper was ended their bard, in his singing robes and girt around the temples with a golden
fillet, stood up and sang. He sang how once a king of the Ultonians, having plunged into the
sea-depths, there slew a monster which had wrought much havoc amongst fishers and seafaring
men. The heroes attended to his song, leaning forward with bright eyes. They applauded the
song and the singer, and praised the valour of the heroic man [Footnote: This was Fergus Mac
Leda, Fergus, son of Leda, one of the more ancient kings of Ulster. His contest with the sea-monster
is the theme of a heroic tale.] who had done that deed. Then the champion struck the table
with his clenched hand, and addressed the assembly. Wrath and sorrow were in his voice. It
resembled the brool of lions heard afar by seafaring men upon some savage shore on a still night.

"Famous deeds," he said, "are not wrought now amongst the Red Branch. I think we are all become
women. I grow weary of these huntings in the morning and mimic exercises of war, and this training
of steeds and careering of brazen chariots stained never with aught but dust and mire, and
these unearned feastings at night and vain applause of the brave deeds of our forefathers.
Come now, let us make an end of this. Let us conquer Banba [Footnote: One of Ireland's many
names.] wholly in all her green borders, and let the realms of Lir, which sustain no foot of
man, be the limit of our sovereignty. Let us gather the tributes of all Ireland, after many
battles and much warlike toil. Then more sweetly shall we drink while the bards chaunt our
own prowess. Once I knew a coward who boasted endlessly about his forefathers, and at last
my anger rose, and with a flat hand I slew him in the middle of his speech, and paid no eric,
for he was nothing. We have the blood of heroes in our veins, and we sit here nightly boasting
about them; about Rury, whose name we bear, being all his children; and Macha the warrioress,
who brought hither bound the sons of Dithorba and made them rear this mighty dun; and Combat
son of Fiontann; and my namesake Fergus,[Footnote: This was the king already referred to who
slew the sea-monster. The monster had left upon him that mark and memorial of the struggle.]
whose crooked mouth was no dishonour, and the rest of our hero sires; and we consume the rents
and tributes of Ulster which they by their prowess conquered to us, and which flow hither in
abundance from every corner of the province. Valiant men, too, will one day come hither and
slay us as I slew that boaster, and here in Emain Macha their bards will praise them. Then
in the halls of the dead shall we say to our sires, 'All that you got for us by your blood
and your sweat that have we lost, and the glory of the Red Branch is at an end.'"

That speech was pleasing to the Red Branch, and they cried out that Fergus Mac Roy had spoken
well. Then all at once, on a sudden impulse, they sang the battle-song of the Ultonians, and
shouted for the war so that the building quaked and rocked, and in the hall of the weapons
there was a clangour of falling shields, and men died that night for extreme dread, so mightily
shouted the Ultonians around their king and around Fergus. When the echoes and reverberations
of that shout ceased to sound in the vaulted roof and in the far recesses and galleries, then
there arose somewhere upon the night a clear chorus of treble voices, singing, too, the war-chant
of the Ultonians, as when rising out of the clangour of brazen instruments of music there shrills
forth the clear sound of fifes. For the immature scions of the Red Branch, boys and tender
youths, awakened out of slumber, heard them, and from remote dormitories responded to their
sires, and they cried aloud together and shouted. The trees of Ulster shed their early leaves
and buds at that shout, and birds fell dead from the branches.

Concobar struck the brazen canopy with his silver rod. The smitten brass rang like a bell,
and the Ultonians in silence hearkened for the words of their clear-voiced king.

"No ruler of men," he said, "however masterful and imperious, could withstand this torrent
of martial ardour which rolls to- night through the souls of the children of Rury, still less
I, newly come to this high throne, having been but as it were yesterday your comrade and equal,
till Fergus, to my grief, resigned the sovereignty, and caused me, a boy, to be made king of
Ulla and captain of the Red Branch. But now I say, ere we consider what province or territory
shall first see the embattled Red Branch cross her borders, let us enquire of Cathvah the Ard-Druid,
whether the omens be propitious, and whether through his art he is able to reveal to us some
rite to be performed or prohibition to be observed."

That proposal was not pleasing to Fergus, but it pleased the Red Branch, and they praised the
wisdom of their king.

Then Cathvah the Ard-Druid [Footnote: High Druid, or Chief Druid. Similarly we have Ard-Ri
or High King.] spake.

"It hath been foretold," he said, "long since, that the Ultonians shall win glory such as never
was and never will be, and that their fame shall endure till the world's end. But, first, there
are prophecies to be accomplished and predictions to be fulfilled. For ere these things may
be there shall come a child to Emain Macha, attended by clear portents from the gods; through
him shall arise our deathless fame. Also it hath been foretold that there shall be great divisions
and fratricidal strife amongst the children of Rury, a storm of war which shall strip the Red
Branch nigh bare."

Fergus was wroth at this, and spoke words of scorn concerning the diviner, and concerning all
omens, prohibitions, and prophecies. Concobar, too, and all the Red Branch, rebuked the prophet.
Yet he stood against them like a rock warred on by winds which stand immovable, let them rage
as they will, and refused to take back his words. Then said Concobar:

"Many are the prophecies which came wandering down upon the mouths of men, but they are not
all to be trusted alike. Of those which have passed thy lips, O Cathvah, we utterly reject
the last, and think the less of thee for having reported it. But the former which concerns
the child of promise hath been ever held a sure prophecy, and as such passed down through all
the diviners from the time of Amargin, the son of Milesius, who first prophesied for the Gael.
And now being arch-king of the Ultonians, I command thee to divine for us when the coming of
the child shall be."

Then Cathvah, the Ard-Druid, put on his divining apparel and took his divining instruments
in his hands, and made his symbols of power upon the air. And at first he was silent, and,
being in a trance, stared out before him with wide eyes full of wonder and amazement, directing
his gaze to the east. In the end he cried out with a loud voice, and prophesying, sang this lay:

    "Yea, he is coming. He draweth nigh.
    Verily It is he whom I behold--
    The predicted one--the child of many prophecies--
    Chief flower of the Branch that is over all--
    The mainstay of Emaiti Macha--the battle-prop of the Ultonians--
    The torch of the valour and chivalry of the North--
    The star that is to shine for ever upon the forehead of the Gael.
    It is he who slumbers upon Slieve Fuad--
    The child who is like a star--
    Like a star upon Slieve Fuad.
    There is a light around him never kindled at the hearth of Lu,
    The Grey of Macha keeps watch and ward for him,
        [Footnote: Madia's celebrated grey war-steed. The meaning
         of the allusion will be understood presently.]
    And the whole mountain is filled with the Tuatha de Danan."
       [Footnote: These were the gods of the pagan Irish.
        Tuatha=nations, De=gods, Danan=of Dana. So it means
        the god nations sprung from Dana also called Ana. She
        is referred to in an ancient Irish Dictionary as Mater
        deorurn Hibernensium.]

Then his vision passed from the Druid, he raised up his long white hands and gave thanks to
the high gods of Erin that he had lived to see this day.

When Cathvah had made an end of speaking there was a great silence in the hall.

CHAPTER II

THE BOYS OF THE ULTONIANS

   "And dear the school-boy spot
   We ne'er forget though there we are forgot."

                  BYRON.

   "There were his young barbarians all at play."

                  BYRON.

In the morning Fergus Mac Roy said to the young king, "What shall we do this day, O Concobar?
Shall we lead forth our sweet-voiced hounds into the woods and rouse the wild boar from his
lair, and chase the swift deer, or shall we drive afar in our chariots and visit one of our
subject kings and take his tribute as hospitality, which, according to thee, wise youth, is
the best, for it is agreeable to ourselves and not displeasing to the man that is tributary."

"Nay," said Concobar, "let us wait and watch this day. Hast thou forgotten the words of Cathvah?"

"Truly, in a manner I had," said Fergus, "for I never much regarded, the race of seers, or
deemed the birds more than pleasant songsters, and the stars as a fair spectacle, or druidic
instruments aught but toys."

"Let us play at chess on the lawn of the dun," said the king, "while our boys exercise themselves
at hurling on the green."

"It is agreeable to me," said Fergus, "though well thou knowest, dear foster-son, that I am
not thy match at the game."

What the champion said was true, for in royal wisdom the king far excelled his foster-father,
and that was the reason why Fergus had abdicated the supreme captainship of the Red Branch
in favour of Concobar, for though his heart was great his understanding was not fine and acute
like the understanding of his foster-son.

The table was set for them upon the lawn before the great painted and glowing palace, and three-footed
stools were put on either side of that table, and bright cloths flung over them. A knight to
whom that was a duty brought forth and unfolded a chess-board of ivory on which silver squares
alternated with gold, cunningly wrought by some ancient cerd, [Footnote: Craftsman.] a chief
jewel of the realm; another bore in his hand the man-bag, also a wonder, glistening, made of
netted wires of findruiney, [Footnote: A bright yellow bronze, the secret of making which is
now lost. The metal may be seen in our museums. In beauty it is superior to gold. ] and took
therefrom the men and disposed them in their respective places on the board, each in the centre
of his own square. The gold men were on the squares of silver, and the silver on the squares
of gold. The table was set under the shadowing branches of a great tree, for it was early summer
and the sun shone in his strength. So Concobar and Fergus, lightly laughing, affectionate and
mirthful, the challenger and the challenged, came forth through the wide doorway of the dun.
Armed youths went with them. The right arm of Fergus was cast lightly over the shoulder of
Concobar, and his ear was inclined to him as the young king talked, for their mutual affection
was very great and like that of a great boy and a small boy when such, as often happens, become
attached to one another. So Concobar and Fergus sat down to play, though right seldom did the
Champion win any game from the King. Concobar beckoned to him one of the young knights. It
was Conall Carna, [Footnote: Conall the Victorious. He came second to Cuculain amongst the
Red Branch Knights. He is the theme of many heroic stories. Once in a duel he broke the right
arm of his opponent. He bade his seconds tie up his own corresponding arm.] son of Amargin,
youngest of the knights of Concobar. "Son of Amargin," said the king, "do thou watch over the
boys this day in their pastimes. See that nothing is done unseemly or unjust. Observe narrowly
the behaviour and disposition of the lads, and report all things clearly to me on the morrow."

So saying, he moved one of the pieces on the board, and Conall Carna strode away southwards
to where the boys were already dividing themselves into two parties for a match at hurling.

That son of Amargin was the handsomest youth of all the province. White and ruddy was his beardless
countenance. Bright as gold which boils over the edge of the refiner's crucible was his hair,
which fell curling upon his broad shoulders and over the circumference of his shield, outshining
its splendour. By his side hung a short sword with a handle of walrus-tooth; in his left hand
he bore two spears tipped with glittering bronze. Fergus and Concobar watched him as he strode
over the grass; Concobar noted his beauty and grace, but Fergus noted his great strength. Soon
the boys, being divided into two equal bands, began their pastime and contended, eagerly urging
the ball to and fro. The noise of the stricken ball and the clash of the hurles shod with bronze,
the cries of the captains, and the shouting of the boys, filled all the air.

That good knight stood midway between the goals, eastward from the players. Ever and anon with
a loud clear voice he reproved the youths, and they hearkening took his rebukes in silence
and obeyed his words. Cathvah came forth that day upon the lawn, and thus spoke one of the
boys to another in some pause of the game, "Yonder, see! the Ard-Druid of the Province. Wherefore
comes he forth from his druidic chambers to-day at this hour, such not being his wont?" And
the other answered lightly, laughing, and with boyish heedlessness, "I know not wherefore;
but well he knows himself." And therewith ran to meet the ball which passed that way. There
was yet a third who watched the boys. He stood afar off on the edge of the plain. He had a
little shield strapped on his back, two javelins in one hand, and a hurle in the other. He
was very young and fair. He stood looking fixedly at the hurlers, and as he looked he wept.
It was the child who had been promised to the Ultonians.

CHAPTER III

DETHCAEN'S NURSLING

     "Very small and beautiful like a star."

                    --HOMER.

                    SHELLEY.

Sualtam of Dun Dalgan on the Eastern Sea, took to wife Dectera, daughter of Factna the Righteous.
She was sister of Concobar Mac Nessa. Sualtam was the King of Cooalney [Footnote: Now the barony
of Cooley, a mountainous promontory which the County of Louth projects into the Irish Sea.]
a land of woods and mountains, an unproductive headland reaching out into the Ictian Sea.

Dectera bare a son to Sualtam, and they called him Setanta, That was his first name. His nurse
was Dethcaen, the druidess, daughter of Cathvah the druid, the mighty wizard and prophet of
the Crave Rue. His breast-plate [Footnote: A poetic spell or incantation. So even the Christian
hymn of St. Patrick was called the lorica or breastplate of Patrick.] of power, woven of druidic
verse, was upon Ulla [Footnote: Ulla is the Gaelic root of Ulster.] in his time, upon all the
children of Rury in their going out and their coming in, in war and in peace. Dethcaen [Footnote:
Dethcaen is compounded of two words which mean respectively, colour, and slender.] sang her
own songs of protection for the child. His mother gave the child suck, but the rosy-cheeked,
beautiful, sweetly-speaking daughter of Cathvah nursed him. On her breast and knee she bare
him with great love. Light of foot and slender was Dethcaen; through the wide dun of Sualtam
she went with her nursling, singing songs. She it was that discovered his first ges, [Footnote:
Ges was the Irish equivalent of the tabu.] namely, that no one should awake him while he slept.
He had others, sacred prohibitions which it was unlawful to transgress, but this was discovered
by Dethcaen. She discovered it while he was yet a babe. With her own hands Dethcaen washed
his garments and bathed his tiny limbs; lightly and cheerfully she sprang from her couch at
night when she heard his voice, and raised him from the cradle and wrapped him tenderly, and
put him into the hands of his mother. She watched him when he slumbered; there was great stillness
in the palace of Sualtam when the child slept. She repeated for him many tales and taught him
nothing base. When he was three years old, men came with hounds to hunt the stream which ran
past Dun Dalgan. [Footnote: Now Dundalk, capital of the County of Louth.] Early in the morning
Setanta heard the baying of the hounds and the shouting of the men. They were hunting a great
water-dog which had his abode in this stream. Setanta leaped from his couch and ran to the
river. Well he knew that stream and all its pools and shallows; he knew where the water-dog
had his den. Thither by circuit he ran and stood before the month of the same, having a stone
in either hand. The hunted water-dog drew nigh. Maddened with fear and rage he gnashed his
teeth and growled, and then charged at the child. There, O Setanta, with the stroke of one
stone thou didst slay the water-dog! The dog was carried in procession with songs to the dun
of Sualtam, who that night gave a great feast and called many to rejoice with him, because
his only son had done bravely. A prophet who was there said, "Thou shalt do many feats in thy
time, O Setanta, and the last will resemble the first."

Setanta played along the sand and by the frothing waves of the sea-shore under the dun. He
had a ball and an ashen hurle shod with bronze; joyfully he used to drive his ball along the
hard sand, shouting among his small playmates. The captain of the guard gave him a sheaf of
toy javelins and taught him how to cast, and made for him a sword of lath and a painted shield.
They made for him a high chair. In the great hall of the dun, when supper was served, he used
to sit beside the champion of that small realm, at the south end of the table over against
the king. Ever as evening drew on and the candles were lit, and the instruments of festivity
and the armour and trophies on the walls and pillars shone in the cheerful light, and the people
of Sualtam sat down rejoicing, there too duly appeared Setanta over against his father by the
side of the champion, very fair and pure, yellow-haired, in his scarlet bratta fastened with
a little brooch of silver, serene and grave beyond his years, shining there like a very bright
star on the edge of a thunder-cloud, so that men often smiled to see them together.

While Sualtam and his people feasted, the harper harped and trained singers sang. Every day
the floor was strewn with fresh rushes or dried moss or leaves. Every night at a certain hour
the bed-makers went round spreading couches for the people of Sualtam. Sometimes the king slept
with his people in the great hall. Then one warrior sat awake through the night at his pillow
having his sword drawn, and another warrior sat at his feet having his sword drawn. The fire-place
was in the midst of the hall. In winter a slave appointed for that purpose from time to time
during the night laid on fresh logs. Rude plenty never failed in the dun of Sualtam. In such
wise were royal households ordered in the age of the heroes. For the palace, it was of timber
staunched with clay and was roofed with rushes. Without it was white with lime, conspicuous
afar to mariners sailing in the Muirnict. [Footnote: The Irish Sea or St. George's Channel.
Muirnict means the Ictian Sea.] There was a rampart round the dun and a moat spanned by a drawbridge.
Before it there was a spacious lawn. Down that lawn there ever ran a stream of sparkling water.
Setanta sailed his boats in the stream and taught it here to be silent, and there to hum in
rapids, or to apparel itself in silver and sing liquid notes, or to blow its little trumpet
from small cataracts.

CHAPTER IV

SETANTA RUNS AWAY

     "For a boy's way is the wind's way."

                      --LONGFELLOW

And now the daily life of that remote dun no longer pleased the boy, for the war-spirit within
drave him on. Moreover he longed for comrades and playfellows, for his fearful mother permitted
him no longer to associate with children of that rude realm whose conversation and behaviour
she misliked for her child. She loved him greatly and perceived not how he changed, or how
the new years in their coming and their going both gave and took away continually.

In summer the boy sat often with the chief bard under the thatched eaves of the dun, while
the crying swallows above came and went, asking many questions concerning his forefathers back
the ascending line up to Rury, and again downwards through the ramifications of that mighty
stem, and concerning famous marches and forays, and battles and single combats, and who was
worthy and lived and died well, and who not. More than all else he delighted to hear about
Fergus Mac Roy, who seemed to him the greatest and best of all the Red Branch. In winter, cradled
in strong arms, he listened to the reminiscences and conversation of the men of war as they
sat and talked round the blazing logs in the hall, while the light flickered upon warlike faces,
and those who drew drink went round bearing mead and ale.

Upon his seventh birthday early in the morning he ran to his mother and cried, "Mother, send
me now to Emain Macha, to my uncle."

Dectera grew pale when she heard that word and her knees smote together with loving fear. For
answer she withdrew him from the society of the men and kept him by herself in the women's
quarter, which was called grianan. The grianan was in the north end of the palace behind the
king's throne. In the hall men could see above them the rafters which upheld the roof and the
joining of the great central pillar with the same. From the upper storey of the grianan a door
opened upon the great hall directly above the throne of the king, and before that door was
a railed gallery.

Thence it was the custom of Dectera to supervise in the morning the labours of the household
thralls and at night to rebuke unseemly revelry, and at the fit hour to command silence and
sleep. Thence too in the evening, ere he went to his small couch, Setanta would cry out "good-night"
and "good slumber" to his friends in the hall, who laughed much amongst themselves for the
secret of his immurement was not hid. Moreover, Dectera gave straight commandment to her women,
at peril of her displeasure and of sore bodily chastisement, that they should not speak to
him any word concerning Emain Macha. The boy as yet knew not where lay the wondrous city, whether
in heaven or on earth or beyond the sea. To him it was still as it were a fairy city or in
the land of dreams.

One day he saw afar upon the plain long lines of lowing kine and of laden garrans wending north-westward.
He questioned his mother concerning that sight. She answered, "It is the high King's tribute
out of Murthemney." [Footnote: A territory conterminous with the modern County of Louth.]

"Mother," he said, "how runs the road hence to the great city?"

"That thou shalt not know," said his mother, looking narrowly on the boy.

But still the strong spirit from within, irresistible, urged on the lad. One day while his
mother conversed with him, inadvertently she uttered certain words, and he knew that the road
to Emain Macha went past the mountain of Slieve Fuad. [Footnote: Now the Fews mountain lying
on the direct way between Dundalk and Armagh.] That night he dreamed of Emain Macha, and he
rose up early in the morning and clambered on to the roof of the palace through a window and
gazed long upon the mountain. The next night too he dreamed of Emain Macha, and heard voices
which were unintelligible, and again the third night he heard the voices and one voice said,
"This our labour is vain, let him alone. He is some changeling and not of the blood of Rury.
He will be a grazier, I think, and buy cattle and sell them for a profit." And the other said,
"Nay, let us not leave him yet. Remember how valiantly he faced the fierce water-dog and slew
him at one cast." When he climbed to the roof, as his manner was, to gaze at the mountain,
he thought that Slieve Fuad nodded to him and beckoned. He broke fast with his mother and the
women that day and ate and drank silently with bright eyes, and when that meal was ended he
donned his best attire and took his toy weapons and a new ball and his ashen hurle shod with
red bronze.

"Wherefore this holiday attire?" said his mother.

"Because I shall see great people ere I put it off," he answered.

She kissed him and he went forth as at other times to play upon the lawn by himself. The king
sat upon a stone seat hard by the door of the grianan. Under the eaves he sat sunning himself
and gazing upon the sea. The boy kneeled and kissed his hand. His father stroked his head and
said, "Win victory and blessings, dear Setanta." He looked at the lad as if he would speak
further, but restrained himself and leaned back again in his seat.

Dectera sat in the window of the upper chamber amongst her women. They sat around her sewing
and embroidering. She herself was embroidering a new mantle for the boy against his next birthday,
though that indeed was far away, but ever while her hands wrought her eyes were on the lawn.

"Mother," cried Setanta," watch this stroke."

He flung his ball into the air and as it fell met it with his hurle, leaning back and putting
his whole force into the blow, and struck it into the clouds. It was long before the ball fell.
It fell at his feet.

"Mother," he cried again, "watch this stroke."

He went to the east mearing of the spacious lawn and struck the ball to the west. It traversed
the great lawn ere it touched the earth and bounded shining above the trees. Truly it was a
marvellous stroke for one so young. As he went for his ball the boy stood still before the
window. "Give me thy blessing, dear mother," he said.

"Win victory and blessing for ever, O Setanta," she answered. "Truly thou art an expert hurler."

"These feats," he replied, "are nothing to what I shall yet do in needlework, O mother, when
I am of age to be trusted with my first needle, and knighted by thy hands, and enrolled amongst
the valiant company of thy sewing-women."

"What meaneth the boy?" said his mother, for she perceived that he spoke awry.

"That his childhood is over, O Dectera," answered one of her women, "and that thou art living
in the past and in dreams. For who can hold back Time in his career?"

The queen's heart leaped when she heard that word, and the blood forsook her face. She bent
down her head over her work and her tears fell. After a space she looked out again upon the
lawn to see if the boy had returned, but he had not.

She bade her women go and fetch him, and afterwards the whole household. They called aloud,
"Setanta, Setanta," but there was no answer, only silence and the watching and mocking trees
and a sound like low laughter in the leaves; for Setanta was far away.

The boy came out of that forest on the west side. Soon he struck the great road which from
Ath-a-clia [Footnote: Ath-a-cliah, i.e., the Ford of the Hurdles. It was the Irish name for
Dublin.] ran through Murthemney to Emain Macha, and saw before him the purple mountain of Slieve
Fuad. In his left hand was his sheaf of toy javelins; in his right the hurle; his little shield
was strapped upon his back. The boy went swiftly, for there was power upon him that day, and
with his ashen hurle shod with red bronze ever urged his ball forward. So he went driving,
his ball before him. At other times he would cast a javelin far out westward and pursue its
flight. Ever as he went there ever flew beside him a grey- necked crow. "It is a good omen,"
said the boy, for he knew that the bird was sacred to the Mor-Reega.

He was amazed at his own speed and the elasticity of his limbs. Once when he rose after having
gathered his thrown javelin, a man stood beside him who had the port and countenance of some
ancient hero, and whose attire was strange. He was taller and nobler than any living man. He
bore a rod-sling in his right hand, and in his left, in a leash of bronze, he led a hound.
The hound was like white fire. Setanta could hardly look in that man's face, but he did. The
man smiled and said--

"Whither away, my son?"

"To Emain Macha, to my uncle Concobar," said the boy.

"Dost thou know me, Setanta?" said the man.

"I think thou art Lu Lam-fada Mac Ethlend," [Footnote: Lu the Long-Handed son of Ethlenn. This
mysterious being, being one of the deities of the pagan Irish, seems to have been the Sun-god.]
answered Setanta.

"I am thy friend," said the man, "fear nothing, for I shall be with thee always."

Then the man and the hound disappeared as if they had been resolved into the rays of the sun;
Setanta saw nothing, only the grey-necked crow starting for flight. Then a second man in a
wide blue mantle specked with white like flying foam came against him and flung his mantle
over Setanta. There was a sound in his ears like the roaring of the sea. [Footnote: This man
was Mananan son of Lir. He was the Sea-god.] Chariots and horses came from the east after that.
Setanta recognised those who urged on the steeds, they were his own people. "Surely," he said,
"I shall be taken now." The men drave past him. "If I mistake not," he said, "the man who flung
his mantle over me was Mananan the son of Lir."

Divers persons, noble and ignoble, passed him on the way, some riding in chariots, some going
on foot. They went as though they saw him not.

In the evening he came to Slieve Fuad. He gathered a bed of dried moss and heaped moss upon
his shield for a pillow. He wrapped himself in his mantle, and lay down to sleep, and felt
neither cold nor hunger. While he slept a great steed, a stallion, grey to whiteness, came
close to him, and walked all round him, and smelt him, and stayed by him till the morning.

Setanta was awaked by the loud singing of the birds. Light of heart the boy started from his
mossy couch and wondered at that tuneful chorus. The dawning day trembled through the trees
still half-bare, for it was the month of May. 

He walked in boldly through the gates in the morning, and said that he had been out all night
without leave, and that he was bored to the point of death. So the Médecin Chef punished him.
He imprisoned him, and as there was no prison, he served his six days' sentence in the open air.
He donned his eighty pounds of marching kit, and tramped up and down the plank walks, and round
behind the baracques, in the mud, in full sight of all, so that all might witness his humiliation.
He did not go on duty again in the ward, and in consequence, the ward suffered through lack
of his grudging, uncouth administration.

Sometimes he met the Directrice as he trudged up and down. He was always afraid to meet her,
because once she had gone to the Médecin Chef and had him pardoned.

Her gentle heart had been touched at the sight of his public disgrace, so she had had his sentence
remitted, and he had been obliged to go back to the ward, to the work he loathed, to the patients
he despised, after only two hours' freedom in a rare October sun. Since then, he had carefully
avoided the Directrice when he saw her blue cloak in the distance, coming down the trottoir.
Women were a nuisance at the Front.

He frequently encountered the man who picked up papers, and frankly envied him, for this man
had a very easy post. He was mobilized as a member of the formation of Hospital Number ----,
and his work consisted in picking up scraps of paper scattered about the grounds within the
enclosure. He had a long stick with a nail in the end, and a small basket because there wasn't
much to pick up.

With the nail, he picked up what scraps there were, and did not even have to stoop over to do
it. He walked about in the clean, fresh air, and when it rained, he cuddled up against the
stove in the pharmacy. The present paper-gatherer was a chemist; his predecessor had been a priest.
It was a very nice position for an able-bodied man with some education, and Fouquet greatly
desired it himself, only he feared he was not sufficiently well educated, since in civil life
he was only a farm hand. So in his march up and down the trottoir he cast envious glances at the
man who picked up papers.

So, bearing his full-weight marching kit, he walked up and down, between the baracques, dogged
and defiant. The other orderlies and stretcher bearers laughed at him, and said: "There goes
Fouquet, punished!" And the patients, who missed him, asked: "Where is Fouquet? Punished?"
And the nurse of that ward, who also missed Fouquet, said: "Poor Fouquet! Punished!" But Fouquet,
swaggering up and down in full sight of all, was pleased because he had had a good drink the
night before, and did not have to wait upon the patients the day after, and to him, the only
sane thing about the war was the discipline of the Army.

ALONE

Rochard died to-day. He had gas gangrene. His thigh, from knee to
buttock, was torn out by a piece of German shell.

It was an interesting case, because the infection had developed so
quickly.

He had been placed under treatment immediately too, reaching the
hospital from the trenches about six hours after he had been wounded.

To have a thigh torn off, and to reach first-class surgical care within six hours, is practically
immediately. Still, gas gangrene had developed, which showed that
the Germans were using very poisonous shells.

At that field hospital there had been established a surgical school, to which young men, just graduated
from medical schools, or old men, graduated long ago from medical schools, were sent to learn
how to take care of the wounded. After they had received a two months' experience in this
sort of war surgery, they were to be placed in other hospitals, where they could do the work
themselves. So all those young men who did not know much, and all those old men who had never known
much, and had forgotten most of that, were up here at this field hospital, learning. This had
to be done, because there were not enough good doctors to go round, so in order to care for the
wounded at all, it was necessary to furbish up the immature and the senile. However, the Médecin Chef
in charge of the hospital and in charge of the surgical school, was a brilliant surgeon and a
good administrator, so he taught the students a good deal. Therefore, when Rochard came into the
operating room, all the young students and the old students crowded round to see the case. It
was all torn away, the flesh from that right thigh, from knee to
buttock, down to the bone, and the stench was awful.

The various students came forward and timidly pressed the upper part of the thigh, the remaining
part, all that remained of it, with their fingers, and little crackling noises came forth, like
bubbles. Gas gangrene. Very easy to diagnose. Also the bacteriologist from another hospital
in the region happened to be present, and he made a culture of the material discharged from that
wound, and afterwards told the Médecin Chef that it was positively
and absolutely gas gangrene.

But the Médecin Chef had already taught the students that gas gangrene may be recognized by the
crackling and the smell, and the fact that the patient, as a rule, dies pretty soon.

They could not operate on Rochard and amputate his leg, as they wanted to do. The infection
was so high, into the hip, it could not be done. Moreover, Rochard had a fractured skull as well.
Another piece of shell had pierced his ear, and broken into his brain,
and lodged there.

Either wound would have been fatal, but it was the gas gangrene in
his torn-out thigh that would kill him first.

The wound stank. It was foul.

The Médecin Chef took a curette, a little scoop, and scooped away the dead flesh, the dead
muscles, the dead nerves, the dead blood-vessels.

And so many blood-vessels being dead, being scooped away by that sharp curette, how could the blood
circulate in the top half of that flaccid thigh? It couldn't. Afterwards, into the deep, yawning
wound, they put many compresses of gauze, soaked in carbolic acid, which acid burned deep into
the germs of the gas gangrene, and killed them, and killed much good
tissue besides.

Then they covered the burning, smoking gauze with absorbent cotton, then with clean, neat bandages,
after which they called the stretcher bearers, and Rochard was carried from the operating
table back to the ward.

The night nurse reported next morning that he had passed a night of agony.

"Cela pique! Cela brule!" he cried all night, and turned from side to side to find relief. Sometimes
he lay on his good side; sometimes he lay on his bad side, and the night nurse turned him
from side to side, according to his fancy, because she knew that on neither one side nor the
other would he find relief, except such mental relief as he got by turning. She sent one of
the orderlies, Fouquet, for the Médecin Chef, and the Médecin Chef came to the ward, and looked
at Rochard, and ordered the night nurse to give him morphia, and again morphia, as often as
she thought best. For only death could bring relief from such pain as that, and only morphia,
a little in advance of death, could bring partial relief.

So the night nurse took care of Rochard all that night, and turned him and turned him, from one
side to the other, and gave him morphia, as the Médecin Chef had ordered. She listened to his
cries all night, for the morphia brought him no relief. Morphia gives a little relief, at times,
from the pain of life, but it is only death that brings absolute relief.

When the day nurse came on duty next morning, there was Rochard in agony. "Cela pique! Cela brule!"
he cried. And again and again, all the time, "Cela pique! Cela brule!", meaning the pain in his
leg. And because of the piece of shell, which had penetrated his ear and lodged in his brain
somewhere, his wits were wandering. No one can be fully conscious with an inch of German shell
in his skull. And there was a full inch of German shell in Rochard's skull, in his brain somewhere,
for the radiographist said so. He was a wonderful radiographist and anatomist, and he worked
accurately with a beautiful, expensive machine, given him, or given the field hospital, by
Madame Curie.

So all night Rochard screamed in agony, and turned and twisted, first on the hip that was there,
and then on the hip that was gone, and on neither side, even with many ampoules of morphia,
could he find relief. Which shows that morphia, good as it is, is not as good as death. So when the
day nurse came on in the morning, there was Rochard strong after a night of agony, strong after
many picqures of strychnia, which kept his heart beating and his lungs breathing, strong after many
picqures of morphia which did not relieve his pain. Thus the science of healing stood baffled
before the science of destroying.

Rochard died slowly. He stopped struggling. He gave up trying to find relief by lying upon
the hip that was there, or the hip that was gone. He ceased to cry. His brain, in which was
lodged a piece of German shell, seemed to reason, to become reasonable, with break of day. The
evening before, after his return from the operating room, he had been decorated with the Médaille
Militaire, conferred upon him, in extremis, by the General of the region. Upon one side of
the medal, which was pinned to the wall at the head of the bed, were the words: Valeur et Discipline.
Discipline had triumphed. He was very good and quiet now, very obedient and disciplined, and
no longer disturbed the ward with his moanings.

Little Rochard! Little man, gardener by trade, aged thirty-nine, widower, with one child! The
piece of shell in his skull had made one eye blind. There had been a hæmorrhage into the eyeball,
which was all red and sunken, and the eyelid would not close over it, so the red eye stared and
stared into space. And the other eye drooped and drooped, and the white showed, and the eyelid
drooped till nothing but the white showed, and that showed that he was dying. But the blind, red
eye stared beyond. It stared fixedly, unwinkingly, into space. So always the nurse watched
the dull, white eye, which showed the approach of death.

No one in the ward was fond of Rochard. He had been there only a few hours. He meant nothing
to any one there. He was a dying man, in a field hospital, that was all. Little stranger Rochard,
with one blind, red eye that stared into Hell, the Hell he had come from. And one white, dying
eye, that showed his hold on life, his brief, short hold. The nurse cared for him very gently,
very conscientiously, very skilfully. The surgeon came many times to look at him, but he had
done for him all that could be done, so each time he turned away
with a shrug.

Fouquet, the young orderly, stood at the foot of the bed, his feet
far apart, his hands on his hips, and regarded Rochard, and said: "Ah!

La la! La la!" And Simon, the other orderly, also stood at the foot of the bed, from time to
time, and regarded Rochard, and said: "Ah! C'est triste! C'est bien triste!"

So Rochard died, a stranger among strangers.

And there were many people there to wait upon him, but there was no one there to love him. There
was no one there to see beyond the horror of the red, blind eye,
of the dull, white eye, of the vile, gangrene smell.

And it seemed as if the red, staring eye was looking for something the hospital could not
give. And it seemed as if the white, glazed eye was indifferent to
everything the hospital could give.

And all about him was the vile gangrene smell, which made an aura
about him, and shut him into himself, very completely.

And there was nobody to love him, to forget about that smell.

He sank into a stupor about ten o'clock in the morning, and was unconscious
from then till the time the nurse went to lunch.

She went to lunch reluctantly, but it is necessary to eat. She instructed Fouquet, the orderly,
to watch Rochard carefully, and to call her if there was any change.

After a short time she came back from lunch, and hurried to see Rochard, hurried behind the flamboyant,
red, cheerful screens that shut him off from the rest of the ward.

Rochard was dead.

At the other end of the ward sat the two orderlies, drinking wine.

PARIS, April 15, 1915.

A BELGIAN CIVILIAN

A big English ambulance drove along the high road from Ypres, going in the direction of a French
field hospital, some ten miles from Ypres. Ordinarily, it could have had no business with this
French hospital, since all English wounded are conveyed back to their own bases, therefore an
exceptional case must have determined its route. It was an exceptional case--for the patient
lying quietly within its yawning body, sheltered by its brown canvas wings, was not an English
soldier, but only a small Belgian boy, a civilian, and Belgian civilians belong neither to
the French nor English services. It is true that there was a hospital for Belgian civilians at the
English base at Hazebrouck, and it would have seemed reasonable to have taken the patient there,
but it was more reasonable to dump him at this French hospital, which was nearer. Not from any
humanitarian motives, but just to get rid of him the sooner. In war, civilians are cheap things
at best, and an immature civilian, Belgian at that, is very cheap. So the heavy English ambulance
churned its way up a muddy hill, mashed through much mud at the entrance gates of the hospital,
and crunched to a halt on the cinders before the Salle d'Attente, where it discharged its burden
and drove off again.

The surgeon of the French hospital said: "What have we to do with this?" yet he regarded the patient
thoughtfully. It was a very small patient. Moreover, the big English ambulance had driven off again,
so there was no appeal. The small patient had been deposited upon one of the beds in the Salle
d'Attente, and the French surgeon looked at him and wondered what he should do. The patient,
now that he was here, belonged as much to the French field hospital as to any other, and as the
big English ambulance from Ypres had driven off again, there was not much use in protesting.
The French surgeon was annoyed and irritated. It was a characteristic English trick, he thought,
this getting other people to do their work. Why could they not have taken the child to one of
their own hospitals, since he had been wounded in their lines, or else have taken him to the hospital
provided for Belgian civilians, where, full as it was, there was always room for people as small
as this. The surgeon worked himself up into quite a temper. There is one thing about members
of the Entente--they understand each other. The French surgeon's thoughts travelled round and
round in an irritated circle, and always came back to the fact that the English ambulance had gone,
and here lay the patient, and something must be done.

So he stood considering.

  
    A Belgian civilian, aged
   ten. Or thereabouts. Shot
    through the abdomen, or thereabouts.

               And dying, obviously.

As usual, the surgeon pulled and twisted the long, black hairs on his hairy, bare arms, while
he considered what he should do. He considered for five minutes, and then ordered the child to the
operating room, and scrubbed and scrubbed his hands and his hairy arms, preparatory to a major
operation. For the Belgian civilian, aged ten, had been shot through the abdomen by a German shell,
or piece of shell, and there was nothing to do but try to remove it. It was a hopeless case,
anyhow. The child would die without an operation, or he would die during the operation, or he
would die after the operation. The French surgeon scrubbed his hands viciously, for he was
still greatly incensed over the English authorities who had placed the case in his hands and then
gone away again. They should have taken him to one of the English bases, St. Omer, or Hazebrouck--it
was an imposition to have dumped him so unceremoniously here simply because "here" was so many
kilometres nearer. "Shirking," the surgeon called it, and was much incensed.

After a most searching operation, the Belgian civilian was sent over to the ward, to live or die as
circumstances determined. As soon as he came out of ether, he began to bawl for his mother. Being
ten years of age, he was unreasonable, and bawled for her incessantly and could not be pacified.
The patients were greatly annoyed by this disturbance, and there
was indignation that the welfare and comfort of useful soldiers should
be interfered with by the whims of a futile and useless civilian,
a Belgian child at that.

The nurse of that ward also made a fool of herself over this civilian, giving him far more attention
than she had ever bestowed upon a soldier. She was sentimental, and his little age appealed to
her--her sense of proportion and standard of values were all awrong. The Directrice appeared
in the ward and tried to comfort the civilian, to still his howls, and then, after an hour
of vain effort, she decided that his mother must be sent for. He was obviously dying, and it was
necessary to send for his mother, whom alone of all the world he
seemed to need.

So a French ambulance, which had nothing to do with Belgian civilians, nor with Ypres, was sent
over to Ypres late in the evening to fetch this mother for whom the
Belgian civilian, aged ten, bawled so persistently.

She arrived finally,
and, it appeared, reluctantly. About ten o'clock in the evening she
arrived, and the moment she alighted from the big ambulance sent to
fetch her, she began complaining. She had complained all the way over,
said the chauffeur. She climbed down backward from the front seat,
perched for a moment on the hub, while one heavy leg, with foot shod
in slipping sabot, groped wildly for the ground. A soldier with a
lantern watched impassively, watched her solid splash into a mud puddle
that might have been avoided. So she continued her complaints. She
had been dragged away from her husband, from her other children, and
she seemed to have little interest in her son, the Belgian civilian,
said to be dying. However, now that she was here, now that she had
come all this way, she would go in to see him for a moment, since
the Directrice seemed to think it so important. The Directrice of
this French field hospital was an American, by marriage a British
subject, and she had curious, antiquated ideas. She seemed to feel
that a mother's place was with her child, if that child was dying.
The Directrice had three children of her own whom she had left in
England over a year ago, when she came out to Flanders for the life
and adventures of the Front. But she would have returned to England
immediately, without an instant's hesitation, had she received word
that one of these children was dying. Which was a point of view opposed
to that of this Belgian mother, who seemed to feel that her place
was back in Ypres, in her home, with her husband and other children.
In fact, this Belgian mother had been rudely dragged away from her
home, from her family, from certain duties that she seemed to think
important. So she complained bitterly, and went into the ward most
reluctantly, to see her son, said to be dying.

She saw her son, and
kissed him, and then asked to be sent back to Ypres. The Directrice
explained that the child would not live through the night. He stopped
for a while to look, and then called the lad, who came at once and stood erect and silent before
the King. He was now full ten years of age, straight and well-made and with sinews as hard
as tempered steel. When he saw the company looking at him, he blushed, and his blushing became
him well.

"Culain the smith," said Concobar, "hath invited us to a feast. If it is pleasing to thee,
come too."

"It is pleasing indeed," replied the boy, for he ardently desired to see the famous artificer,
his people, his furnaces, and his engines. "But let me first, I pray thee, see this our game
brought to an end, for the boys await my return. After that I will follow quickly, nor can
I lose my way upon the moor, for the road hence to the smith's dun is well trodden and scored
with wheels, and the sky too at night is red above the city."

Concobar gave him permission, and Setanta hastened back to his playmates, who hailed him gladly
in his returning, for they feared that the King might have taken him away from them.

The King and his great men went away eastward after that and they conversed eagerly by the
way, talking sometimes of a certain recent great rebellion of the non-Irian kings of Ulla,
[Footnote: The Ultonians were descended from Ir, son of Milesius.] and of each other's prowess
and the prowess of the insurgents, and sometimes of the smith and his strange and unusual invitation.

"Say no word and do no thing," said Concobar, "at which even a very angry and suspicious man
might take offence, for as to our host and his artificers, their ways are not like ours, or
their thoughts like our thoughts, and they are a great and formidable people."

The Red Branch did not relish that speech, for they thought that under the measureless canopy
of the sky there were no people great or formidable but themselves.

                  MILTON.

When Culain saw far away the tall figures of the Ultonians against the sunset, and the flashing
of their weapons and armour, he cried out with a loud voice to his people to stop working and
slack the furnaces and make themselves ready to receive the Red Branch; and he bade the household
thralls prepare the supper, roast, boiled and stewed, which he had previously ordered. Then
he himself and his journeymen and apprentices stripped themselves, and in huge keeves of water
filled by their slaves they washed from them the smoke and sweat of their labour and put on
clean clothes. The mirrors at which they dressed themselves were the darkened waters of their
enormous tubs.

Culain sent a party of his men and those who were the best dressed and the most comely and
who were the boldest and most eloquent in the presence of strangers, to meet the high King
of the Ultonians on the moor, but he himself stood huge in the great doorway just beyond the
threshold and in front of the bridge over which the Red Branch party was to pass. He had on
him over his clothes a clean leathern apron which was not singed or scored. It was fastened
at his shoulders and half covered his enormous hairy chest, was girt again at his waist and
descended below his knees. He stood with one knee crooked, leaning upon a long ash-handled
sledge with a head of glittering bronze. There he gave a friendly and grave welcome to the
King and to all the knights one by one. It was dusk when Concobar entered the dun.

"Are all thy people arrived?" said the smith.

"They are," said Concobar.

Culain bade his people raise the drawbridge which spanned the deep black moat surrounding the
city, and after that, with his own hands he unchained his one dog. The dog was of great size
and fierceness. It was supposed that there was no man in Ireland whom he could not drag down.
He had no other good quality than that he was faithful to his master and guarded his property
vigilantly at night. He was quick of sight and hearing and only slept in the daytime. Being
let loose he sprang over the moat and three times careered round the city, baying fearfully.
Then he stood stiffly on the edge of the moat to watch and listen, and growled at intervals
when he heard some noise far away. It was then precisely that Setanta set forth from Emain
Macha. Earth quaked to the growling of that ill beast.

In the meantime the smith went into the dun, and when he had commanded his people to light
the candles throughout the chamber, he slammed to the vast folding doors with his right hand
and his left, and drew forth the massy bar from its place and shot it into the opposing cavity.
There was not a knight amongst the Red Branch who could shut one of those doors, using both
hands and his whole strength. Of the younger knights, some started to their feet and laid their
hands on their sword hilts when they heard the bolt shot.

The smith sat down on his high seat over against Concobar, with his dusky sons and kinsmen
around him, and truly they contrasted strangely with the bravery and beauty of the Ultonians.
He called for ale, and holding in his hands a huge four-cornered mether of the same, rimmed
with silver and furnished with a double silver hand-grip, he pledged the King and bade him
and his a kindly welcome. He swore, too, that no generation of the children of Rury, and he
had wrought for many, had done more credit to his workmanship than themselves, nor had he ever
made the appliances of war for any of the Gael with equal pleasure. Concobar, on the other
hand, responded discreetly, and praised the smith-work of Culain, praising chiefly the shield
called Ocean [Footnote: Concobar's shield. When Concobar was in danger the shield roared. The
sea, too, roared responsive.], which was one of the wonders of the north-west of Europe. The
smith and all his people were well pleased at that speech, and Culain bade his thralls serve
supper, which proved to be a very noble repast. There was enough and to spare for all the Ultonians.
When supper was ended, the heroes and the artificers pledged each other many times and drank
also to the memory of famous men of yore and their fathers who begat them, as was right and
customary; and they became very friendly and merry without intoxication, for intoxication was
not known in the age of the heroes.

Then said Concobar: "We have this night toasted many heroes who are gone, and, as it is not
right that we should praise ourselves, I propose that we drink now to the heroes that are coming,
both those unborn, and those who, still being boys, are under tutors and instructors; and for
this toast I name the name of my nephew Setanta, son of Sualtam, who, if any, will one day,
O Culain, if I mistake not, illustrate in an unexampled manner thy skill as an artificer of
weapons and armour."

"Is he then a boy of that promise, O Concobar?" said the smith, "for if he is I am truly rejoiced
to hear it."

"He is all that I say," answered the King somewhat hotly, "and of a beauty corresponding. And
of that thou shalt be the judge to- night, for he is coming, and indeed I am momentarily expecting
to hear the loud clamour of his brazen hurle upon the doors of the dun, after his having leapt
at one bound both thy moat and thy rampart."

The smith started from his high seat uttering a great oath, such as men used then, and sternly
chid Concobar because he had said that all his people had arrived. "If the boy comes now,"
he said, "ere I can chain the dog, verily he will be torn into small pieces."

Just then they heard the baying of the dog sounding terribly in the hollow night, and every
face was blanched throughout the vast chamber. Then without was heard a noise of trampling
feet and short furious yells and sibilant gaspings, as of one who exerts all his strength,
after which a dull sound at which the earth seemed to shake, mingled with a noise of breaking
bones, and after that silence. Ere the people in the dun could do more than look at each other
speechless, they heard a clear but not clamorous knocking at the doors of the dun. Some of
the smith's young men back-shot the bolt and opened the doors, and the boy Setanta stepped
in out of the night. He was very pale. His scarlet mantle was in rags and trailing, and his
linen tunic beneath and his white knees red with blood, which ran down his legs and over his
bare feet. He made a reverence, as he had been taught, to the man of the house and to his people,
and went backwards to the upper end of the chamber. The Ultonians ran to meet him, but Fergus
Mac Roy was the first, and he took Setanta upon his mighty shoulder and bore him along and
set him down at the table between himself and the King.

"Did the dog come against thee?" said Culain.

"Truly he came against me," answered the boy.

"And art thou hurt?" cried the smith.

"No, indeed," answered Setanta, "but I think he is."

At that moment a party of the smith's people entered the dun bearing between them the carcass
of the dog from whose mouth and white crooked fangs the blood was gushing in red torrents;
and they showed Culain how the skull of the dog and his ribs had been broken in pieces by some
mighty blow, and his backbone also in divers places. Also they said: "One of the great brazen
pillars which stand at the bridge head is bent awry, and the clean bronze denied with blood,
and it was at the foot of that pillar we found the dog." So saying, they laid the body upon
the heather in front of Culain's high seat, that it might be full in his eye, and when they
did so and again sat down, there was a great silence in the chamber.

CHAPTER VIII

SETANTA, THE PEACE-MAKER

   "The swine-herd
      [Footnote: One of the minor gods. He resembles Mars
      Sylvanus of the Romans to whom swine were sacrificed.]
     of Bove Derg, son of the Dagda,
    The feasts to which he came used to end in blood."

              GAELIC BARD.

Culain sat silent for a long time looking out before him with eyes like iron, and when at last
he spoke his voice was charged with wrath and sorrow.

"O Concobar," he said, "and you, the rest, nobles of the children of Rury. You are my guests
to-night, wherefore it is not lawful that I should take vengeance upon you for the killing
of my brave and faithful hound, who was a better keeper of my treasures than a company of hired
warriors. Truly he cost me nothing but his daily allowance of meat, and there was not his equal
as a watcher and warder in the world. An eric, therefore, I must have. Consult now together
concerning its amount and let the eric be great and conspicuous, for, by Orchil [Footnote:
The queen of the infernal regions.] and all the gods who rule beneath the earth, a small eric
I will not accept."

Concobar answered straight, "Thou shalt not get from me or from the Ultonians any eric, small
or great. My nephew slew the beast in fair fight, defending his life against an aggressor.
But I will say something else, proud smith, and little it recks me whether it is pleasing to
thee or not. Had thy wolf slain my nephew not one of you would have left this dun alive, and
of your famous city of artificers I would have made a smoking heap."

The Ultonians fiercely applauded that speech, declaring that the smiths should get no eric,
great or small, for the death of their monster. The smiths thereupon armed themselves with
their hammers, and tongs, and fire-poles, and great bars of unwrought brass, and Culain himself
seized an anvil withal to lay waste the ranks of the Red Branch. The Ultonians on their side
ran to the walls and plucked down their spears from the pegs, and they raised their shields
and balanced their long spears, and swords flashed and screeched as they rushed to light out
of the scabbards, and the vast chamber glittered with shaking bronze and shone with the eyeballs
of angry men, and rang with shouts of defiance and quick fierce words of command. For the Red
Branch embattled themselves on one side of the chamber and the smiths upon the other, burning
with unquenchable wrath, earth-born. The vast and high dome re- echoing rang with the clear
terrible cries of the Ultonians and the roar of the children of the gloomy Orchil, and, far
away, the magic shield moaned at Emain Macha, and the waves of the ocean sent forth a cry,
for the peril of death and of shortness of life were around Concobar in that hour. And, though
the doors of thick oak, brass-bound, were shut and barred, there came a man into the assembly,
and he was not seen. He was red all over, both flesh and raiment, as if he had been plunged
in a bath of blood. His countenance was distraught and his eyes like those of an insane man,
and sparks new from them like sparks from a smith's stithy when he mightily hammers iron plucked
white from the furnace. Smoke and fire came from his mouth. He held in his hand a long boar-yard.
The likeness of a boar bounded after him. He traversed the vast chamber with the velocity of
lightning, and with his boar-yard beat such as were not already drunk with wrath and battle-fury,
and shot insane fire into their souls. [Footnote: This was the demon referred to in the lines
at the head of the chapter.]

Then indeed it wanted little, not the space of time during which a man might count ten, for
the beginning of a murder grim and great as any renowned in the world's chronicles, and it
is the opinion of the learned that, in spite of all their valour and beautiful weapons, the
artificers would then and there have made a bloody end of the Red Branch had the battle gone
forward. But at this moment, ere the first missile was hurled on either side, the boy Setanta
sprang into the midst, into the middle space which separated the enraged men, and cried aloud,
with a clear high voice that rang distinct above the tumult--

"O Culain, forbear to hurl, and restrain thy people, and you the Ultonians, my kinsmen, delay
to shoot. To thee, O chief smith, and thy great-hearted artificers I will myself pay no unworthy
eric for the death of thy brave and faithful hound. For verily I will myself take thy dog's
place, and nightly guard thy property, sleepless as he was, and I will continue to do so till
a hound as trusty and valiant as the hound whom I slew is procured for thee to take his place,
and to relieve me of that duty. Truly I slew not thy hound in any wantonness of superior strength,
but only in the defence of my own life, which is not mine but my King's. Three times he leaped
upon me with white fangs bared and eyes red with murder, and three times I cast him off, but
when the fourth time he rushed upon me like a storm, and when with great difficulty I had balked
him on that occasion also, then I took him by the throat and by his legs and flung him against
one of the brazen pillars withal to make him stupid. And truly it was not my intention to kill
him and I am sorry that he is dead, seeing that he was so faithful and so brave, and so dear
to thee whom I have always honoured, even when I was a child at Dun Dalgan, and whom, with
thy marvel-working craftsman, I have for a long time eagerly desired to see. And I thought
that our meeting, whensoever it might be, would be other than this and more friendly."

As he went on speaking the fierce brows of the smith relaxed, and first he regarded the lad
with pity, being so young and fair, and then with admiration for his bravery. Also he thought
of his own boyish days, and as he did so a torrent of kindly affection and love poured from
his breast towards the boy, yea, though he saw him standing before him with the blood of his
faithful hound gilding his linen lena and his white limbs. Yet, indeed, it was not the hound's
blood which was on the boy, but his own, so cruelly had the beast torn him with his long and
strong and sharp claws.

"That proposal is pleasing to me," he said, "and I will accept the eric, which is distinguished
and conspicuous and worthy of my greatness and of my name and reputation amongst the Gael.
Why should a man be angry for ever when he who did the wrong offers due reparation?" Therewith
over his left shoulder he flung the mighty anvil into the dark end of the vast chamber among
the furnaces, at the sound of whose falling the solid earth shook. On the other hand Concobar
rejoiced at this happy termination of the quarrel, for well he knew the might of those huge
children of the gloomy Orchil. He perceived, too, that he could with safety entrust the keeping
of the lad to those people, for he saw the smith's countenance when it changed, and he knew
that among those artificers there was no guile.

"It is pleasing to me, too," he said, "and I will be myself the lad's security for the performance
of his promise."

"Nay, I want no security," answered the smith. "The word of a scion of the Red Branch is security
enough for me."

Thereafter all laid aside their weapons and their wrath. The smiths with a mighty clattering
cast their tools into the dark end of the chamber, and the Ultonians hanged theirs upon the
walls, and the feasting and pledging and making of friendly speeches were resumed. There was
no more any anger anywhere, but a more unobstructed flow of mutual good-will and regard, for
the Ultonians felt no more a secret inclination to laugh at the dusky artificers, and the smiths
no longer regarded with disdain the beauty, bravery, and splendour of the Ultonians.

In the meantime Setanta had returned to his place between the King and Fergus Mac Roy. There
a faintness came upon him, and a great horror overshadowed him owing to his battle with the
dog, for indeed it was no common dog, and when he would have fallen, owing to the faintness,
they pushed him behind them so that he lay at full length upon the couch unseen by the smiths.
Concobar nodded to his chief Leech, and he came to him with his instruments and salves and
washes. There unobserved he washed the cruel gashes cut by the hound's claws, and applied salves
and stitched the skin over the wounds, and, as he did so, in a low voice he murmured healing
songs of power.

"Where is the boy?" said Culain.

"He is reposing a little," said Concobar, "after his battle and his conflict."

After a space they gave Setanta a draught of mighty ale, and his heart revived in him and the
colour returned to his cheeks wherein before was the pallor of death, and he sat up again in
his place, slender and fair, between Concobar and Fergus Mac Roy. The smiths cried out a friendly
welcome to him as he sat up, for they held him now to be their foster-son, and Culain himself
stood up in his place holding in both hands a great mether [Footnote: A four- cornered quadrangular
cup.] of ale, and he drank to all unborn and immature heroes, naming the name of Setanta, son
of Sualtam, now his dear foster-son, and magnified his courage, so that the boy blushed vehemently
and his eyelids trembled and drooped; and all the artificers stood up too and drank to their
foster-son, wishing him victory and success, and they drained their goblets and dashed them,
mouth downwards, upon the brazen tables, so that the clang reverberated over Ulla. Setanta
thereupon stood up while the smiths roared a welcome to their foster-son, and he said that
it was not he who had gained the victory, for that someone invisible had assisted him and had
charged him with a strength not his own. Then he faltered in his speech and said again that
he would be a faithful hound in the service of the artificers, and sat down. The smiths at
that time would not have yielded him for all the hounds in the world. 

He seemed to have rather heroic qualities of endurance, of bravery, of discipline. Nor were they
the heroic qualities that suddenly develop in a moment of exaltation, but on the contrary, they
were developed by months of extreme agony, of extreme bodily pain. He could have been so disagreeable,
had he chosen. And as he cared so little to have his life saved, his goodness could not have
been due to that. It seemed that he was merely very decent, very considerate of others, and wanted
to give as little trouble as he could, no matter what took place.

Only he got thinner and weaker, and more and more gentle, and at last after five months of this,
the Directrice was touched by his conduct and suggested that here was a case of heroism as well
worthy of the Croix de Guerre as were the more spectacular movements
on the battlefield.

It took a few weeks longer, of gentle suggestion on her part, to convey this impression to the
General, but at last the General entered into correspondence with the officers of the regiment
to which Grammont belonged, and it then transpired that as a soldier
Grammont had displayed the same qualities of consideration for others
and of discipline, that he was now displaying in a hospital bed.

Finally one day, the news came that Grammont was to be decorated. Everyone else in the ward,
who deserved it, had been decorated long ago, naturally, for they had not belonged to the Bataillon
d'Afrique. Their services had been recognized long ago. Now, however, after these many months
of suffering, Grammont was to receive the Croix de Guerre. He was nearly dead by this time.
When told the news, he smiled faintly. He did not seem to care. It seemed to make very little
impression upon him.

Yet it should have made an impression, for he was a convicted criminal,
and it was a condescension that he should be so honoured at all.

He had somehow won this honour, this token of forgiveness, by suffering
so long, so uncomplainingly.

     However, a long delay took place, although finally his
     papers came, his citation, in which he was cited in the orders of
the regiment as having done a very brave deed, under fire.

                           He smiled a little at that.

It had taken place so long ago, this time when he had done the deed, received the wound that
kept him suffering so long. It seemed so little worth while to acknowledge it now, after all
these months, when he was just ready to leave.

Then more delay took place, and Grammont got weaker, and the orderlies said among themselves
that if the General was ever going to decorate this man, that he had better hurry up. However,
so long a time had passed that it did not much matter. Grammont was pleased with his citation.
It seemed to make it all right for him, somehow.

It seemed to give him standing among his fellow patients. The hideous tattoo marks on his
arms and legs, chest and back, which proclaimed him an apache, which showed him such every time
his wound was dressed, were about to be overlaid with a decoration for bravery upon the field
of battle. But still the General did not come. Grammont grew very weak and feeble and his patience
became exhausted.

He held on as long as he could. So he died finally, after a long pull, just twenty minutes
before the General arrived with his medals.

PARIS, 27 June, 1916.

AN INCIDENT

At the intersection of the rue du Bac and the Boulevard St. Germain
rises the statue of Claude Chappe, rising like a rock in the midst
of the stream of traffic, and like a rock splitting the stream and
diverting it into currents which flow east and west, north and south,
smoothly and without collision. Verily, she is taken away and
may not be recovered, for the Clan Usna came last night with a great company to the dun and
they stormed it in their might and their valour, and their irresistible fury, and they have
taken away Deirdre in their swift chariots, and have gone eastwards to the Muirnicht with intent
to cross the sea northwards, and abide henceforth with their prize in the land of the Picts
and of the Albanah, beyond the stormy currents of the Moyle."

Fergus Mac Roy, when he heard that word, sat up with eyes bright- blazing in his head. Dearer
to him than all the rest were those sons of Usna, namely--Naysi, Anli, and Ardane, and dearest
of the three was Naysi, who excelled all the youth of his time in beauty, valour, and accomplishments.

"Bind that man!" cried Concobar. His voice rang terribly through the vast chamber. Truly it
sheared through men's souls like a dividing sword.

His guards took the man and bound him. "Lead him away now," said Concobar," and stone him with
stones even to the parting of body with soul."

The man was one of Deirdre's guard.

A great silence fell upon the assembly after that and no man spoke, only they looked at the
King and then again at the Champion, and, as it were, questioned one another silently with
their eyes. It was the silence behind which run the Fomorh, brazen-throated and clad with storm.
Well knew those wise men that what they long apprehended had come now to pass, namely, the
fierce and truceless antagonism of the King and of the ex-King. Well they knew that Concobar
would not forgive the Clan Usna, and that Fergus Mac Roy would not permit them to be punished.
Therefore, great and mighty as were the men, yet on this occasion they might be likened only
to cattle who stand aside astonished when two fierce bulls, rending the earth as they come,
advance against each other for the mastery of the herd. In the high King's face the angry blood
showed as two crimson spots one on either cheek, and his eyes, harder than steel, sparkled
under brows more rigid than brass. On the other hand, the face of the Champion darkened as
the sea darkens when a black squall descends suddenly upon its sunny and glittering tides,
wrinkling and convulsing all the face of the deep. His listlessness and amiability alike went
out of him, and he sat huge and erect in his throne. His mighty chest expanded and stood out
like a shield, and the muscles of his neck, stronger than a bull's, became clear and distinct,
and his gathering ire and stern resolution rushed stormfully through his nostrils. The King
first spoke.

"To the man who has broken our law and abducted the child of ill omen, I decree death by the
sword and burial with the three throws of dishonour, and if taken alive, then death by burning
with the same, and if he escapes out of Erin, then sentence of perpetual banishment and expatriation."

"He shall not be slain, and he shall not be burned, and he shall not be exiled. I say it, even
I, Fergus, son of the Red Rossa, Champion of the North. Let the man who will gainsay me show
himself now in Emain Macha. Let him bring round the buckle of his belt."

His eyes, as he spoke, were like flames of fire under a forehead dark crimson, and with his
clenched fist he struck the brazen table before his throne, so that the clang and roar of the
quivering bronze sounded through all the borders of Ulla.

"I will gainsay thee, O Fergus," cried the King, "I am the guardian and the executor of the
laws of the Ultonians, and those laws shall prevail over thee and over all men."

"All laws in restraint of true love and affection are unjust," said Fergus, "and the law by
which Deirdre was consigned to virginity was the unrighteous enactment of cold-hearted and
unrighteous men."

CHAPTER X

DEIRDRE

     "Beautiful the beginning of love,
      A man and a woman and the birds of Angus above them."

                    GAELIC BARD.

The birth of the child Deirdre, daughter of the chief poet of Ulla, was attended with a great
portent, for the child shrieked from the mother's womb. Cathvah and the Druids were consulted
concerning that omen. They addressed themselves to their art of divination, and having consulted
their oracles and gods and familiar spirits, they gave a clear counsel to the Ultonians.

"This child," they said, "will become a woman, in beauty surpassing all the women who have
ever been born or will be born. Her union with a man will be a cause of great sorrow to the
Ultonians. Let her, therefore, be exposed after birth; or, if you would not slay the Arch-Poet's
only child, let her be sternly immured; let her be reared to womanhood in utter and complete
and inviolable solitude, and live and die in her virginity."

The Ultonians determined that the child should live and be immured. These things took place
in the reign of Factna the Righteous, father of Concobar. When the child was born she was called
Deirdre. The Ultonians appointed for her a nurse and tutoress named Levarcam. They built for
her and for the nurse a strong dun in a remote forest and set a ward there, and they made a
solemn law enjoining perpetual virginity on the child of ill omen, and the Druids shed a zone
of terror round the dun.

Concobar Mac Nessa in the wide circuit of his thoughts consulted always for the inviolability
of that law, and the stern maintenance of the watching and warding.

Unseen and unobserved, forgotten by all save the wise elders of the Ultonians and by Concobar
their King, whose thoughts ranged on all sides devising good for the Red Branch, the child
Deirdre grew to be a maiden. Though her beauty was extraordinary, yet her mind was as beautiful
as her form, so that the Lady Levarcam loved her exceedingly.

One day when the first flush of early womanhood came upon the maiden, she said to her tutoress
as they sat together and conversed--

"Are all men like those our guards who defend us against savage beasts and the merciless Fomorians,
dear Levarcam?"

"Those our guards are true and brave men," said Levarcam.

"Surely they are," said the girl, "and we lack no courtesy and due attention at their hands,
but dear foster-mother, my question is not answered. Maybe it is not to be answered and that
I am curious overmuch. Are all men grim, grave, and austere, wearing rugged countenances scored
with ancient wounds, and bearing each man upon his shoulders the weight of some fearful responsibility?
Are all men like that, dear Levarcam?"

"Nay, indeed," said the other, "there arc youths too, gracious, and gay, and beautiful, as
well as grave men such as these."

They sat together in their sunny grianan, [Footnote: A derivative from Grian, the sun. The
grianan was an upper chamber, more elegantly furnished than the hall, usually with large windows
and therefore well lit and reserved for the use of women.] embroidering while they conversed.
It was early morning and the air was full of the noises and odours of sweet spring-time.

"I know that now," said the maiden, "which I only guessed before, for waking or sleeping I
have dreamed of a youth who was as unlike these men as the rose-tree with its roses is unlike
the rugged oak-tree or the wrinkled pine that has wrestled with a thousand storms. I would
wish to have him for a playfellow and pleasant acquaintance. Of maidens, too, such as myself
I have dreamed, yet they do not appear to me to be so alluring or so amiable as that youth."

"Describe him more particularly," said Levarcam. "Tell me his tokens one by one that I may know."

"He is tall and strong but very graceful in all his motions; and of speech and behaviour both
gay and gracious. He is white and ruddy, whiter than snow and ruddier than the rose or the
fox- glove, where the heroic blood burns bright in his comely cheeks. His eyes are blue-black
under fine and even brows and his hair is a wonder, so dense is it, so lustrous and so curling,
blacker than the crow's wing, more shining than the bright armour of the chaffer. His body
is broad above and narrow below, strong to withstand and agile to pursue. His limbs long and
beautifully proportioned; his hands and feet likewise, and his step elastic Smiles seldom leave
his eyes and lips, and his mouth is a fountain of sweet speech. O that I were acquainted with
him and he with me? I think we should be happy in each other's company. I think I could love
him as well as I do thee, dear foster-mother."

As she spoke, Deirdre blushed, and first she stooped down over her work and then put before
her face and eyes her two beautiful hands, rose-white, with long delicate nails pink-flushed
and transparent; and tears, clearer than dewdrops, gushed between her ringers and fell in bright
showers upon the embroidery. Then she arose and flung her soft white arms around Levarcam and
wept on her bosom.

"There is one youth only amongst the Red Branch," said Levarcam, "who answers to that description,
namely Naysi, the son of Usna, who is the battle-prop of the Ultonians and the clear-shining
torch of their valour, and what god or druid or power hath set that vision before thy mind,
I cannot tell."

"Would that I could see him with eyes and have speech with him," answered the girl. "If but
once he smiled upon me and I heard the sweet words flow from his mouth which is beyond price,
then gladly would I die!"

"Thou shall both see him and have speech with him, O best, sweetest, dearest, and loveliest
of all maidens. Truly I will bring him to thee and thee to him, for there is with me power
beyond the wont of women."

Now Levarcam was a mighty Druidess amongst the Ultonians. So the lady in whom they trusted
forgot the ancient prophecies and the stern commands of the Red Branch and of their King, owing
to the great love which she bore to the maiden and the great compassion which grew upon her
day by day, as she observed the life of the solitary girl and thought of the cruel law to which
all her youth and beauty and wealth of sweet love beyond all the jewels of the world were thus
barbarously sacrificed by the Ultonians in obedience to soothsayers and Druids.

Naysi, son of Usna, once in a hunting became separated from his companions. He wandered far
in that forest, seeking some one who should direct him upon his way. Oftentimes he raised his
voice, but there was no answer. Such were his beauty, his grace, and his stature, that he seemed
more like a god than a man, and such another as Angus Ogue, son of Dagda, [Footnote: Angus
Ogue was the god of youth and beauty, son of the Dagda who seems to have been the genius of
earth and its fertility or perhaps the Zeus of our Gaelic mythology.] whose fairy palace is
on the margin of the Boyne. His head and his feet were bare. His short hunting-cloak was dark-red
with flowery devices along the edge. On his breast he wore a brooch of gold bronze; carbuncles
and precious stones were set in the bronze, and it was carved all over with many spiral devices.
His shirt below the mantle was coloured like the tassels of the willow trees. His hair was
fastened behind with a clasp and an apple of red gold, and that apple lay below the blades
of his ample shoulders. In one hand he bore a broken leash of red bronze, and in the other
two hunting spears with blades of flashing findruiney and the hafts were long, slender, and
shining. By his thigh hung a short sword in a sheath of red yew and beside it the polished
and nigh transparent horn of the Urus, suspended in a baldrick of knitted thread of bronze.
The grass stood erect from the pressure of his light feet. His manly face had not yet known
the razor; only the first soft down of budding manhood was seen there. His countenance was
pure and joyous with bright beaming eyes, and his complexion red and white and of a brilliancy
beyond words. In his heart was no guile, only indomitable valour and truth and loyalty and
sweet affection. He had never known woman save in the way of courtesy. The very trees and rocks
and stones seemed to watch him as he passed.

Then suddenly and unawares an ice-cold air struck chill into his inmost being, the bright earth
was obscured and the sun grew dark in the heavens and menacing voices were heard and horrid
forms of evil, monstrous, not to be described, came against him, and they bade him return as
he had come or they would tear him limb from limb in that forest. Yet the son of Usna was by
no means dismayed, only he flushed with wrath and scorn and he drew his sword and went on against
the phantoms. In truth Naysi was at that moment passing through the zone of terror which the
Ultonian Druids had shed around the dun where Deirdre was immured. The phantoms gave way before
him and Naysi passed beyond the zone. "Surely," he said, "there is some chief jewel of the
jewels of the world preserved in this place."

He came to an opening in the forest. Beyond it there was a great space which was cleared and
girt all round by trees. There was a dun in its midst. Scarlet and white were the walls of
that dun. There was a watch-tower on one side of the dun and a man there sitting in the watchman's
seat; a grianan on the other with windows of glass. The roof of the dun was covered all over
with feathers of birds of various hues, and shone with a hundred colours. The doorway was the
narrowest which Naysi had ever seen. The door pillars were of red yew curiously carved, having
feet of bronze and capitals of carved silver, and the lintel above was a straight bar of pure
silver. A knotted band or thickening ran round the walls of the dun like a variegated zone,
for the colours of it were many and each different from the colours on the walls. In the world
there was no such prison as there was no such captive as that prison held. Armed men of huge
stature and terrible aspect went round the dun. Their habiliments were black, their weapons
without ornament, the pins of their mantles were of iron. With each company went a slinger
having his sling bent, an iron bolt in the sling, and his thumb in the string-loop, men who
never missed their mark and never struck aught, whether man or beast, that they did not slay.
Great hounds such as were not known amongst the Ultonians went with those men. They were grey
above and tawny beneath, as large as wild oxen after the growth of one year. They were quick
of sight and scent, fiercer than dragons and swifter than eagles; they were not quick of sight
and scent to-day. The Lady Levarcam had great power. In and around that dun were three hundred
men of war, foreigners, picked men of the great fighting tribes of Banba. Such was the decree
of the Ultonians and their wise King, so greatly did they fear concerning those prophecies
and omens and concerning the child who in Emain Macha shrieked out of her mother's womb. Naysi
regarded the dun with wonder and amazement, and with amazement the astonishing rigour of the
watch and ward which were kept there, and the more he looked the more he wondered. It seemed
to the hunter that he had chanced upon one of the abodes of the enchanted races of Erin, namely
the Tuatha De Dana or the Fomorians, whom the sons of Milesius by their might had driven into
the mountains and unfrequented places and who, now immortal and invisible, and possessing great
druidic power, were worshipped as gods by the Gael. He knew he was in great peril, but his
stout heart did not fail; he was resolved to see this adventure to an end.

As he was about to step out into the open two women came from the door of the grianan. One
of them was old; she leaned upon her companion and in her right hand held a long white wand
squared save in the middle where it was rounded for the hand grip, very long, unornamented,
and unshod at either extremity. Naysi paid slight attention to her, though, as she was the
first to come forth, he observed these things. The other was young, tall, slender, and lissom,
her raiment costly and splendid like a high queen's on some solemn day, and like a queen's
her behaviour and her pacing over the flowery lawn. Never had that hunter seen such a form,
so proudly modest and virginal, such sweetness, grace, and majesty of bearing. Presently, having
passed a company of the guards, she flung back the white, half-transparent veil that concealed
her face. Then the sudden radiance was like the coming unlocked for out of a white cloud of
that very bright star which shines on the edge of night and morning. All things were transfigured
in her light. Before her the grass grew greener and more glittering and rare flowers started
in her way. A silver basket of most delicate craftsmanship, the work of some cunning cerd,
was on her right arm. It shone clear and sparkling against her mantle which was exceedingly
lustrous, many times folded, darkly crimson, and of substance unknown. She towered above her
aged companion, straight as a pillar of red yew in a king's house. So, unwitting, jocund, and
innocent, fresh and pure as the morning, she paced over the green lawn, going in the direction
of that youth, even Naysi, son of Usna the Ultonian. Naysi's loudly beating heart fell silent
when he saw how she came straight towards him; he retreated into the forest, so amazing and
so confounding was the radiance of that beauty. A company of those grim warders, silent and
watchful, followed close upon the women. As they went they slipped the muzzles from the mouths
of their dogs and lead them forward leashed. The countenances of the men shewed displeasure.
From the tower the watchman cried aloud words in an unknown tongue, hoarse, barbaric accents
charged with energy and strong meaning. His voice rang terribly in the hollows of the forest.
There was a counter challenge in the forest repeated many times, the voices of men mingled
with the baying of hounds. There was a ring of sentinels and dogs far out in the forest. The
son of Usna had gone through the ring. For twice seven years and one that astonishing watch
and ward had been maintained day and night without relaxation or abatement. When they came
to the edge of the forest Levarcam addressed the commander of that company. She said, "The
Lady Deirdre would be alone with me in the forest for a little space to gather flowers and
listen to the music of the birds and the stream, relieved, if but for one moment, of this watching
and warding."

The man answered not a word. He was of the Gamanrdians, dwellers by the Sue, which feeds the
great Western River; [Footnote: The Shannon.] his people were of the Clan Dega in the south,
and of the children of Orc [Footnote: In scriptural language "of the seed of the giants," huge,
simple-hearted and simple-minded men, who could obey orders and ask no questions.] from the
Isles of Ore in the frozen seas. [Footnote: The Orkney Islands.] The blood of the Fomoroh was
in those men. The women went on, and that grim company followed, keeping close behind. When
they gained the first cover of the trees Levarcam turned round and stretched over them her
wand. They stood motionless, both men and dogs. Then the women went forward, and alone.

"Fill thy basket now with forest flowers, O sweetest, and dearest, and fairest of all foster-children,
and listen to the songs of the birds and the music of the rill. Cull thy flowers, darling girl,
and cull the flower of thy youth, the flower that grows but once for all like thee, the flower
whose glory puts high heaven to shame, and whose odour makes mad the most wise."

"Where shall I gather that flower, O gentlest and most amiable of foster-mothers? Is it in
the glade or the thicket, or on the margent of the rill?

"It is not to be found by seeking, O fairest of all maidens. Gather it when thou meetest with
it in the way. Wear it in thy heart, be the end what it may. Verily thou wilt not mistake any
other flower for that flower."

"I know not thy meaning, O wise and many-counselled woman, but there is fear upon me, and trembling,
and my knees quake at thy strange words. Now, if the whole world were swallowed up I should
not be surprised. Surely the end of the world is very nigh."

"It is the end of the world and the beginning of the world; and the end of life and the beginning
of life; and death and life in one, and death and life will soon be the same to thee, O Deirdre!"

"There is amazement upon me, and terror, O my foster-mother, on account of thy words, and on
account of the gathering of this flower. Let us return to the dun. Terrible to me are the hollow-
sounding ways of the unknown forest."

"Fear not the unknown forest, O Deirdre. Leave the known and the familiar now that thy time
has come. Go on. Accomplish thy destiny. It is vain to strive against fate and the pre-ordained
designs of the high gods of Erin. Truly I have failed in my trust. I see great wrath in Emain
Macha. I see the Red Branch tossed in storms, and a mighty riving and rending and scattering
abroad, and dismal conflagrations, and the blood of heroes falling like rain, and I hear the
croaking of Byves. [Footnote: Badb, pronounced Byve, was primarily the scald-crow or carrion-crow,
secondarily a Battle-Fury.] Truly I have proved a brittle prop to the Ultonians, but some power
beyond my own drives me on."

"What wild words are these, O wisest of women, and what this rending and scattering abroad,
and showers of blood and croaking of Byves because I cull a flower in the forest?"

"Nay, it is nothing. Have peace and joy while thou canst, sweet Deirdre. Thus I lay my wand
upon thy bosom and enjoin peace!"

"Thou art weary, dear foster-mother. Rest thee here now a little space, while I go and gather
forest flowers. They are sweeter than those that grow in my garden. O, right glad am I to be
alone in the forest, relieved from the observation of those grim-visaged sentinels, to stray
solitary in the dim mysterious forest, and to think my own thoughts there, and dream my dreams,
and recall that vision which I have seen. O Naysi, son of Usna, sweeter than harps is the mere
sound of thy name, O Ultonian!"

Deirdre after that went forward alone into the forest.

Naysi, when he had started back into the forest stood still for a long time in his retreat.
It was the hollow of a tall rock beside a falling stream of water, all flowing snow or transparent
crystal. Holly trees and quicken trees grew from its crest, and long twines of ivy fell down
before like green torrents. Behind them he concealed himself, when he heard the cries and the
challengings and the baying of the hounds. Then he saw the maiden come along the forest glade
by the margent of the stream, her basket filled and over-flowing with flowers. The sentient
stream sang loud and gay to greet her approaching, with fluent liquid fingers striking more
joyously the chords of his stony lyre. Light beyond the sun was shed through the glen before
her. Birds, the brightest of plumage and sweetest of note of all the birds of Banba, [Footnote:
One of Ireland's ancient names.] filled the air with their songs, flying behind her and before
her, and on her right hand and on her left. Through his lattice of trailing ivy the son of
Usna saw her. Her countenance was purer and clearer than morning-dew upon the rose or the lily,
and the rose and lily, nay, the whiteness of the snow of one night and the redness of the reddest
rose, were there. Her eyes were blue-black under eyebrows black and fine, but her clustering
hair was bright gold, more shining than the gold which boils over the edge of the refiner's
crucible. Her forehead was free from all harshness, broad and intelligent, her beautiful smiling
lips of the colour of the berries of the mountain ash, her teeth a shower of lustrous pearls.
Her face and form, her limbs, hands and feet, were such that no defect, blemish or disproportion
could be observed, though one might watch and observe long, seeking to discover them. In that
daughter of the High Poet and Historian of the Hound-race of the North, [Footnote: The hound
was the type of valour. Though Cuculain was pre-eminently the Hound, the Gaelic equivalents
of this word will be discovered in most of the famous names of the cycle.] child of valour
and true wisdom, the body did not predominate over the spirit, or the spirit over the body,
for as her form was of matchless, incomparable, and inexpressible beauty, so her mind was not
a whit less well proportioned and refined. Jocund and happy, breathing innocence and love,
she came up the dell. The birds of Angus [Footnote: Angus Ogue's kisses became invisible birds
whose singing inspired love.] unseen flew above her and shed upon her unearthly graces and
charms from the waving of their immortal wings. A silver brooch lay on her breast, the pin
of fine bronze ran straight from one shoulder to the other. On her head was a lustrous tyre
or leafy diadem shading her countenance, gold above and silver below. Her short kirtle was
white below the rose-red mantle, and fringed with gold thread above her perfect and lightly
stepping feet. Shoes she wore shining with brightest wire of findruiney. As she came up the
dell, rejoicing in her freedom and the sweetness of that sylvan place and the solitude, she
contemplated the bright stream, and sang clear and sweet an unpremeditated song.

Naysi stepped forth from his place, putting aside the ivy with his hands, and came down the
dell to meet her in her coming. She did not scream or tremble or show any signs of confusion,
though she had never before seen any of the youths of the Gael. She only stood still and straight,
and with wide eyes of wonder watched him as he drew nigh, for she thought at first that it
was the genius of that glen and torrent taking form in reply to her druidic lay. Then when
she recognised the comrade and playfellow of her vision, she smiled a friendly and affectionate
greeting. On the other hand, Naysi came trembling and blushing. She was aware that most people
did not accept that term.

She remembered old Colonel Duval--the old Colonel--tall, thin, white, grave. She had been dreadfully
afraid of him. She had had a feeling of satisfaction at his funeral. It was like the feeling
she had when she learned that Colonel Duval had not forgiven Betty
nor left her a cent.

Mrs. Wagoner used to go to see Mrs. Upton--she
went frequently.

It was "her duty" she said. She carried her things--especially advice.

There are people whose visits are like spells of illness.

It took Mrs. Upton a fortnight to get over one of these visits--to
convalesce.

Mrs. Wagoner was "a mother to her": at least, Mrs. Wagoner herself
said so.

In some respects it was rather akin to the substance of that name
which forms in vinegar.

It was hard to swallow: it galled. Even Mrs. Upton's gentleness was overtaxed--and rebelled. She
had stood all the homilies--all the advice. But when Mrs. Wagoner, with her lips drawn in, after
wringing her heart, recalled to her the warning she had given her before she married, she stopped
standing it. She did not say much; but it was enough to make Mrs. Wagoner's stiff bonnet-bows
tremble.

Mrs. Wagoner walked out feeling chills down her spine, as if Colonel
Duval were at her heels.

She had "meant to talk about sending Jim to school": at least she
said so.

She condoled with every one in the neighborhood on the "wretched
ignorance" in which Jim was growing up, "working like a common negro."

She called him "that ugly boy."

Jim was ugly--Mrs. Wagoner said, very ugly. He was slim, red-headed, freckle-faced, weak-eyed;
he stooped and he stammered. Yet there was something about him, with his thin features, which made
one look twice.

Mrs. Wagoner used to say she did not know where that boy got all his ugliness from, for she must
admit his father was rather good-looking before he became so bloated,
and Betty Duval would have been "passable" if she had had any "vivacity."

There were people who said Betty Duval had been a beauty. She was careful in her limitations, Mrs.
Wagoner was. Some women will not admit others are pretty, no matter what the difference in their
ages: they feel as if they were making admissions against themselves.

Once when Jim was a boy Mrs. Wagoner had the good taste to refer in his presence to his "homeliness,"
a term with which she sugar-coated her insult. Jim grinned and shuffled his feet, and then said,
"Kitty's pretty." It was true: Kitty was pretty: she had eyes and hair. You could not look
at her without seeing them--big brown eyes, and brown tumbled hair. Kitty was fifteen--two years
younger than Jim in 187-.

Jim never went to school. They were too poor. All he knew his mother taught him and he got out
of the few old books in the book-case left by the war,--odd volumes of the Waverley novels,
and the Spectator, "Don Quixote," and a few others, stained and battered.

He could not have gone to school if there had been a school to go to: he had to work: work,
as Mrs. Wagoner had truthfully said, "like a common nigger." He did not mind it; a bird born
in a cage cannot mind it much. The pitiful part is, it does not know anything else. Jim did
not know anything else. He did not mind anything much--except chills. He even got used to them;
would just lie down and shake for an hour and then go to ploughing again as soon as the ague was
over, with the fever on him. He had to plough; for corn was necessary. He had this compensation:
he was worshipped by two people--his mother and Kitty. If other people thought him ugly, they thought
him beautiful. If others thought him dull, they thought him wonderfully clever; if others thought
him ignorant, they knew how wise he was.

Mrs. Upton's eyes were bad; but she saw enough to see Jim: the light came into the house with
him; Kitty sat and gazed at him with speechless admiration; hung on his words, which were few;
watched for his smile, which was rare. He repaid it to her by being--Jim. He slaved for her;
waited for her (when a boy waits for his little sister it is something); played with her when
he had time.

They always went to church--old St. Ann's--whenever there was service. There was service there
since the war only every first and third Sunday and every other fifth Sunday. The Uptons and
the Duvals had been vestrymen from the time they had brought the bricks over from England, generations
ago. They had sat, one family in one of the front semicircular pews on one side the chancel,
the other family in the other. Mrs. Upton, after the war, had her choice of the pews; for all
had gone but herself, Jim, and Kitty. She had changed, the Sunday after her marriage, to the
Upton side, and she clung loyally to it ever after. Mrs. Wagoner had taken the other pew--a cold,
she explained at first, had made her deaf. She always spoke of it afterward as "our pew." (The
Billings, from which Mrs. Wagoner came, had not been Episcopalians until Mrs. Wagoner married.)
Carry Wagoner, who was a year older than Kitty, used to sit by her mother, with her big hat and brown
hair. Jim, in right of his sex, sat in the end of his pew.

On this Sunday in question Jim drove his mother and Kitty to church in the horse cart.

The old carriage was a wreck, slowly dropping to pieces. The chickens roosted in it. The cart
was the only vehicle remaining which had two sound wheels, and even
one of these "wabbled" a good deal, and the cart was "shackling."

But straw placed in the bottom made it fairly comfortable. Jim always had clean straw in it for
his mother and sister. His mother and Kitty remarked on it. Kitty looked so well. They reached
church. The day was warm, Mr. Bickersteth was dry. Jim went to sleep during the sermon. He frequently
did this. He had been up since four. When service was over he partially waked--about half-waked.
He was standing in the aisle moving toward the door with the rest of the congregation. A voice
behind him caught his ear:

"What a lovely girl Kitty Upton is."

It was Mrs. Harrison, who lived at the other end of the parish. Jim knew the voice. Another
voice replied:

"If she only were not always so shabby!" Jim knew this voice also. It was Mrs. Wagoner's. Jim waked.

"Yes,
but even her old darned dress cannot hide her. She reminds me of ------" Jim did not know what
it was to which Mrs. Harrison likened her. But he knew it was something beautiful.

"Yes," said Mrs. Wagoner; then added, "Poor thing, she's got no education, and never will have.
To think that old Colonel Duval's fam'bly's come to this! Well, they can't blame me. They're
clean run to seed."

Jim got out into the air.

He felt sick. He had been hit vitally. This was what people thought! and it was true. They
were "clean run to seed." He went to get his cart. (He did not speak to Kitty.) His home came before
his eyes like a photograph: fences down, gates gone, houses ruinous, fields barren. It came to
him as if stamped on the retina by a lightning-flash. He had worked--worked hard. But it was no
use. It was true: they were "clean run to seed." He helped his mother and Kitty into the cart
silently--doggedly. Kitty smiled at him. It hurt him like a blow. He saw every worn place, every
darn in her old dress, and little, faded jacket. Mrs. Wagoner drove past them in her carriage,
leaning out of the window and calling that she took the liberty of
passing as she drove faster than they.

Jim gave his old mule a jerk which made him throw up his head and wince with pain. He was sorry
for it. But he had been jerked up short himself. He was quivering too.

II.

On the following Friday the President of one of the great railway lines which cross Virginia
was in his office when the door opened after a gentle knock and some one entered. (The offices
of presidents of railroads had not then become the secret and mysterious sanctums which they
have since become.) The President was busily engaged with two or three of the Directors, wealthy
capitalists from the North, who had come down on important business. He was very much engrossed;
and he did not look up immediately. When he did so he saw standing inside the door a queer
figure,--long, slim, angular,--a man who looked like a boy, or a boy who looked like a man--red-headed,
freckled-faced, bashful,--in a coat too tight even for his thin figure, breeches too short
for his long legs; his hat was old and brown; his shirt was clean.

     "Well, what do you want?" The President
     was busy.

                 

     It was Jim. His face twitched several times before
     any sound came:
     
     "--I-w-w-w want t-t-t-to ge-get a place."

                 

"This is not the place to get it. I have no place for you."

The President turned back to his friends. At the end of ten minutes, seeing one of his visitors
look toward the door, he stopped in the middle of a sentence and glanced around.

The figure was still there--motionless. The President thought he had been out and come back. He
had not.

"Well?" His key was high.

"---------I-I-w-w-want to-to get a place."

"I told you I had no place for you.

Go to the Superintendent."

"------I i've b-b-b-been to him."

"Well, what did he say?"

"S-s-s-says he ain't got any place."

"Well, I haven't any. Go to Mr. Blake."

"------Iv'e b-been to him.

"Well, go to--to--" The President was looking for a paper. It occupied his mind.

He did not think any further of Jim. But Jim was there.

"--Go-go where?"

"Oh, I don't know--go anywhere--go out of here."

Jim's face worked. He turned and went slowly out. As he reached the door he said:

"Go-go-good-evening g-gentlemen."

The President's heart relented: "Go to the Superintendent," he called.

Next day he was engaged with his Directors when the door opened and the same apparition stepped
within--tall, slim, red-haired, with his little tight coat, short
trousers, and clean shirt.

The President frowned.

"Well, what is it?"

"-- --I-I-I w-w-w-went to-to the S-S-Superintendent."

"Well, what about it?"

"Y-y-you told me to-to go-go to him. H-e-e ain't got any place." The
Directors smiled.

One of them leaned back in his chair, took out a cigar and prepared
to cut the end.

"Well, I can't help it. I haven't anything for you. I told you that yesterday. You must not
come here bothering me; get out."

Jim stood perfectly still--perfectly motionless. He looked as if he had been there always--would
be there always.

The Director with the cigar, having cut it, took out a gold match-box, and opened it slowly,
looking at Jim with an amused smile.

The President frowned and opened his mouth to order him out. He changed
his mind.

"What is your name?"

"J-J-James Upton."

"Where from?"

Jim
told him.

"Whose son are you?"

"C-C-C-Captain J-J-James Upton's."

"What!
You don't look much like him!"

Jim shuffled one foot. One corner
of his mouth twitched up curiously. It might have been a smile. He
looked straight at the blank wall before him.

"You are not much like
your mother either--I used to know her as a girl. How's that?"

Jim
shuffled the other foot a little.

"R-r-run to seed, I reckon."

The
President was a farmer--prided himself on it. The reply pleased him.
He touched a bell. A clerk entered.

"Ask Mr. Wake to come here."

"Can
you carry a barrel of flour?" he asked Jim.

"I-I'll get it there,"
said Jim. He leaned a little forward. His eyes opened.

"Or a sack
of salt? They are right heavy."

"I-I-I'll get it there," said Jim.
His form straightened.

Mr. Wake appeared.

"Write Mr. Day to give
this man a place as brakeman."

"Yes, sir. Come this way." This to
Jim.

Jim electrified them all by suddenly bursting out crying.

The
tension had given way. He walked up to the wall and leaned his head
against it with his face on his arm, shaking from head to foot, sobbing
aloud.

"Thank you, I--I'm ever so much obliged to you," he sobbed.

The
President rose and walked rapidly about the room.

Suddenly Jim turned
and, with his arm over his eyes, held out his hand to the President.

"Good-by."
Then he went out.

There was a curious smile on the faces of the Directors
as the door closed.

"Well, I never saw anything like that before,"
said one of them. The President said nothing.

"Run to seed," quoted
the oldest of the Directors, "rather good expression!"

"Damned good
seed, gentlemen," said the President, a little shortly. "Duval and
Upton.--That fellow's father was in my command. Died at Gettysburg.
He'd fight hell."

Jim got a place--brakeman on a freight-train.

That
night Jim wrote a letter home. You'd have thought he had been elected
President.

It was a hard life: harder than most. The work was hard;
the fare was hard; the life was hard. Standing on top of rattling
cars as they rushed along in the night around curves, over bridges,
through tunnels, with the rain and snow pelting in your face, and
the tops as slippery as ice. There was excitement about it, too: a
sense of risk and danger. Jim did not mind it much. He thought of
his mother and Kitty.

There was a freemasonry among the men. All
knew each other; hated or liked each other; nothing negative about
it.

It was a bad road. Worse than the average. Twice the amount of
traffic was done on the single track that should have been done. Result
was men were ground up--more than on most roads. More men were killed
in proportion to the number employed than were killed in service during
the war. The esprit de corps was strong. Men stood by their trains
and by each other. When a man left his engine in sight of trouble,
the authorities might not know about it, but the men did. Unless there
was cause he had to leave. Sam Wray left his engine in sight of a
broken bridge after he reversed. The engine stopped on the track.
The officers never knew of it; but Wray and his fireman both changed
to another road. When a man even got shaky and began to run easy,
the superintendent might not mind it; but the men did: he had to go.
A man had to have not only courage but nerve.

Jim was not especially
popular among men. He was reserved, slow, awkward. He was "pious"
(that is, did not swear). He was "stuck up" (did not tell "funny things,"
by which was meant vulgar stories; nor laugh at them either). And
according to Dick Rail, he was "stingy as h--l."

These things were
not calculated to make him popular, and he was not. He was a sort
of butt for the free and easy men who lived in their cabs and cabooses,
obeyed their "orders," and owned nothing but their overalls and their
shiny Sunday clothes. He was good-tempered, though. Took all their
gibes and "dev'ling" quietly, and for the most part silently. So,
few actually disliked him. Dick Rail, the engineer of his crew, was
one of those few. Dick "dee-spised" him. Dick was big, brawny, coarse:
coarse in looks, coarse in talk, coarse every way, and when he had
liquor in him he was mean. Jim "bothered" him, he said. He made Jim's
life a burden to him. He laid himself out to do it. It became his
occupation. He thought about it when Jim was not present; laid plans
for it. There was something about Jim that was different from most
others.

"Was Kimbaoth assisting his wife," he asked, "when she took captive the sons of Dithorba?"

"Nay," said the King, "she went forth alone and crossed the Shannon with one step into the
land of the Fir-bolgs, and there, one by one, she bound those builder-giants the sons of Dithorba,
and bore them hither in her might, and truly those five brethren were no small load for the
back of one woman."

"Has anyone seen her in our time?" asked the lad.

"I have," said Concobar. "I saw her at the great fair of Tailteen. There she pronounced a curse
upon me and upon the Red Branch. [Footnote: At Tailteen a man boasted that his wife could outrun
Concobar's victorious chariot-steeds. Concobar compelled the woman to run against his horses.
She won the race, but died at the goal leaving her curse upon the Red Branch.] The curse hath
not yet fallen, but it will fall in my time, and the promised one will come in my time and
he will redeem us from its power. Great tribulation will be his. Question me no more, dear
Setanta, I have said more than enough."

They went forth from the sacred chamber and Concobar locked the doors.

As they crossed the vacant space going to the palace, Concobar said--

"Why art thou sad, dear Setanta?"

"I am not sad," answered the boy.

"Truly there is no sadness in thy face, or thy lips, in thy voice or thy behaviour, but it
is deep down in thine eyes," said the King. "I see it there always."

Setanta laughed lightly. "I know it not," he said.

Concobar went his way after that, musing, and Setanta, having replaced the sacred vessels in
their chamber and having locked the door, strode away into the boys' hall. There was a great
fire in the midst, and the boys sat round it, for it was cold. Cuculain broke their circle,
pushing the boys asunder, and sat down. They tried to drag him away, but he laughed and kept
his place like a rock. Then they called him "a Fomorian, and no man," and perforce made their
circle wider.

                    SHELLEY.

One night when the stars shone brightly, Setanta, as he passed by Cathvah's astrological tower,
heard him declare to his students that whoever should be knighted by Concobar on a certain
day would be famous to the world's end. He was in his coming out of the forest then with a
bundle of young ash trees under his arm. He thought to put them to season and therewith make
slings, for truly he surpassed all others in the use of the sling. Setanta went his way after
that and came into the speckled house. It was the armoury of the Red Branch and shone with
all manner of war- furniture. A fire burned here always, absorbing the damp of the air lest
the metal should take rust. Setanta flung his trees into the rafters over the fire very deftly,
so that they caught and remained there. He said they would season best in that place.

As he turned to go a man stood before him in the vast and hollow chamber.

"I know thee," said the boy. "What wouldst thou now?"

"Thou shalt go forth to-night," said the man, [Footnote: This man was Lu the Long-Handed, the
same who met him when he was leaving home.] "and take captive the Liath Macha and Black Shanghlan.
Power will be given to thee. Go out boldly."

"I am not wont to go out fearfully," answered the lad. "Great labours are thrust upon me."

He went into the supper hall as at other times and took his customary place there, and ate
and drank.

"Thy eyes are very bright," said Laeg.

"They will be brighter ere the day," he replied.

"That is an expert juggler," said Laeg. "How he tosseth the bright balls!"

"Can he toss the stars so?" said Setanta.

"Thou art strange and wild to-night," said Laeg.

"I will be stranger and wilder ere the morrow," cried Setanta.

He stood up to go. Laeg caught him by the skirt of his mantle. The piece came away in his hand.

"Whither art thou going, Setanta?" cried the King from the other end of the vast hall.

"To seek my horses," cried the lad. His voice rang round the hollow dome and down the resounding
galleries and long corridors, so that men started in their seats and looked towards him.

"They are stabled since the setting of the sun," said the chief groom.

"Thou liest," answered the boy. "They are in the hills and valleys of Erin." His eyes burned
like fire and his stature was exalted before their eyes.

"Great deeds will be done in Erin this night," said Concobar.

He went forth into the night. There was great power upon him. He crossed the Plain of the Hurlings
and the Plain of the Assemblies and the open country and the great waste moor, going on to
Dun- Culain. Culain's new hound cowered low when he saw him. The boy sprang over moat and rampart
at one bound and burst open the doors of the smith's house, breaking the bar. The noise of
the riven beam was like the brattling of thunder.

"That is an unusual way to enter a man's house," said Culain. He and his people were at supper.

"It is," said Setanta. "Things more unusual will happen this night. Give me bridles that will
hold the strongest horses." Culain gave him two bridles.

"Will they hold the strongest horses?" said the boy.

"Anything less than the Liath Macha they will hold," said the smith.

The boy snapped the bridles and flung them aside. "I want bridles that will hold the Liath
Macha and Black Shanglan," said he.

"Fire all the furnaces," cried Culain. "Handle your tools; show your might. Work now, men,
for your lives. Verily, if he get not the bridles, soon your dead will be more numerous than
your living."

Culain and his people made the bridles. He gave them to Cuculain. The smiths stood around in
pallid groups. Cuculain took the bridles and went forth. He went south-westwards to Slieve
Fuad, and came to the Grey Lake. The moon shone and the lake glowed like silver. There was
a great horse feeding by the lake. He raised his head and neighed when he heard footsteps on
the hill. He came on against Cuculain and Cuculain went on against him. The boy had one bridle
knotted round his waist and the other in his teeth. He leaped upon the steed and caught him
by the forelock and his mouth. The horse reared mightily, but Setanta held him and dragged
his head down to the ground. The grey steed grew greater and more terrible. So did Cuculain.

"Thou hast met thy master, O Liath Macha, this night," he cried. "Surely I will not lose thee.
Ascend into the heavens, or, breaking the earth's roof, descend to Orchil, [Footnote: A great
sorceress who ruled the world under the earth.] yet even so thou wilt not shake me away."

Ireland quaked from the centre to the sea. They reeled together, steed and hero, through the
plains of Murthemney. "Make the circuit of Ireland Liath Macha and I shall be on the neck of
thee," cried Cuculain. The horse went in reeling circles round Ireland. Cuculain mightily thust
the bit into his mouth and made fast the headstall. The Liath Macha went a second time round
Ireland. The sea retreated from the shore and stood in heaps. Cuculain sprang upon his back.
A third time the horse went round Ireland, bounding from peak to peak. They seemed a resplendent
Fomorian phantom against the stars. The horse came to a stand. "I think thou art tamed, O Liath
Macha," said Cuculain. "Go on now to the Dark Valley." They came to the Dark Valley. There
was night there always. Shapes of Death and Horror, Fomorian apparitions, guarded the entrance.
They came against Cuculain, and he went against them. A voice from within cried, "Forbear,
this is the promised one. Your watching and warding are at end." He rode into the Dark Valley.
There was a roaring of unseen rivers in the darkness, of black cataracts rushing down the steep
sides of the Valley. The Liath Macha neighed loudly. The neigh reverberated through the long
Valley. A horse neighed joyfully in response. There was a noise of iron doors rushing open
somewhere, and a four-footed thunderous trampling on the hollow-sounding earth. A steed came
to the Liath Macha. Cuculain felt for his head in the dark, and bitted and bridled him ere
he was aware. The horse reared and struggled. The Liath Macha dragged him down the Valley.
"Struggle not, Black Shanglan," said Cuculain, "I have tamed thy better." The horse ceased
to struggle. Down and out of the Dark Valley rodest thou, O peerless one, with thy horses.
The Liath Macha was grey to whiteness, the other horse was black and glistening like the bright
mail of the chaffer. He rode thence to Emain Macha with the two horses like a lord of Day and
Night, and of Life and Death. Truly the might and power of the Long-Handed and Far-Shooting
one was upon him that night. He came to Emain Macha. The doors of Macha's stable flew open
before him. He rode the horses into the stable. Macha's war-car brayed forth a brazen roar
of welcome, the Tuatha De Danan shouted, and the car itself glowed and sparkled. The horses
went to their ancient stalls, the Liath Macha to that which was nearer to the door. Cuculain
took off their bridles and hanged them on the wall. He went forth into the night. The horses
were already eating their barley, but they looked after him as he went. The doors shut to with
a brazen clash. Cuculain stood alone in the great court under the stars. A druidic storm was
abroad and howled in the forests. He thought all that had taken place a wild dream. He went
to his dormitory and to his couch. Laeg was asleep with the starlight shining on his white
forehead; his red hair was shed over the pillow. Cuculain kissed him, and sitting on the bed's
edge wept. Laeg awoke.

"Thou wert not well at supper," said Laeg, "and now thou hast been wandering in the damp of
the night, and thou with a fever upon thee, for I hear thy teeth clattering. I sought to hinder
thee, and thou wouldst not be persuaded. Verily, if thou wilt not again obey me, being thy
senior, thou shalt have sore bones at my hands. Undress thyself now and come to bed without delay."

Cuculain did so.

"Thou art as cold as ice," said Laeg.

"Nay, I am hotter than fire," said Cuculain.

"Thou art ice, I say," said Laeg, "and thy teeth are clattering like hailstones on a brazen
shield. Ay, and thine eyes shine terribly."

Laeg started from the couch. He struck flintsparks upon a rag steeped in nitre, and waved it
to a flame, and kindled a lanthorn. He flung his own mantle upon the bed and went forth in
his shirt. The storm raged terribly; the stars were dancing in high heaven. He came to the
house of the Chief Leech and beat at the door. The Leech was not in bed. All the wise men of
Emain Macha were awake that night, listening to the portents.

"Setanta, son of Sualtam, is sick," said Laeg.

"What are his symptoms?" said the Leech.

"He is colder than ice, his eyes shine terribly, and his teeth clatter, but he says that he
is hotter than fire."

The Leech went to Cuculain. "This is not a work for me," he said, "but for a seer. Bring hither
Cathvah and his Druids." Cathvah and and his seers came. They made their symbols of power over
the youth and chanted their incantations and Druid songs. After that Cuculain slept. He slept
for three days and three nights. There was a great stillness while the boy slept, for it was
not lawful at any time for anyone to awake Cuculain when he slumbered.

On the third morning Cuculain awoke. The bright morning sunshine was all around, and the birds
sang in Emain Macha. He called for Laeg with a loud voice and bade him order a division of
the boys to get ready their horses and chariots for charioteering exercise and fighting out
of their cars.

CHAPTER XIV

THE KNIGHTING OF CUCULAIN

     "Then felt I like a watcher of the skies
     When a new planet swims into his ken."

                        KEATS.

The prophecies concerning the coming of some extraordinary warrior amongst the Red Branch had
been many and ancient, and by certain signs Concobar believed that his time was now near. Often
he contemplated his nephew, observed his beauty, his strength, and his unusual proficiency
in all martial exercises, and mused deeply considering the omens. But when he saw him slinging
and charioteering amongst the rest, shooting spears and casting battle-stones at a mark before
the palace upon the lawn, and saw him eating and drinking before him nightly in the hall like
another, and heard his clear voice and laughter amongst the boys, his schoolfellows and comrades,
then the thought or the faint surmise or wish that his nephew might be that promised one passed
out of his mind, for the prophesyings and the rumours had been very great, and men looked for
one who should resemble Lu the Long-Handed, son of Ethlend, [Footnote: This great deity resembled
the Greek Phoebus Apollo. He led the rebellion of the gods against the Fomorian giants who
had previously reduced them to a condition of intolerable slavery. Some say that he was Cuculain's
true father. His favourite weapon was the sling, likened here to the rainbow. It was not a
thong or cord sling, but a pliant rod such as boys in Ireland still make. The milky way was
his chain.] whose sling was like the cloud bow, who thundered and lightened against the giants
of the Fomoroh, who was all power and all skill, whose chain wherewith he used to confine Tuatha
De Danan and Milesians, spanned the midnight sky. The rumours and prophecies were indeed exceeding
great and Cuculain, though he far surpassed the rest, was but a boy like others. He stood at
the head of Concobar's horses when the King ascended his chariot. His shoulder was warm and
firm to the touch when the King lightly laid his hand upon him.

One night there were terrible portents. All Ireland quaked; there was a druidic storm under
bright stars; the buildings rocked; a brazen clangour sounded from the Tec Brac; there were
mighty tramplings and cries and a four-footed thunder of giant hoofs, and they went round Ireland
three times, only the third time swifter and like a hurricane of sound. Cuculain was abroad
that night. There was deep sleep upon the people of Emain, only the chiefs were awake and aware.
Cuculain was sick after that. The Druids stood around his bed.

"The world labours with the new birth," said Concobar. "Maybe my nephew is the forerunner,
the herald and announcer of the coming god!"

One evening, after supper, when the lad came to bid his uncle good-night as his custom was,
he said, "If it be pleasing to thee, my Uncle Concobar, I would be knighted on the morrow,
for I am now of due age, and owing to the instructions of my tutor, Fergus Mac Roy, and thyself,
and my other teachers and instructors, I am thought to be sufficiently versed in martial exercises,
and able to play a man's part amongst the Red Branch."

He was now a man's full height, but his face was a boy's face, and his strength and agility
amazed all who observed him in his exercises.

"Has thou heard what Cathvah has predicted concerning the youth who is knighted on that day?"
said the King.

"Yes," answered the lad.

"That he will be famous and short-lived and unhappy?"

"Truly," he replied.

"And doth thy purpose still hold?"

"Yes," he answered, "but whether it be mine I cannot tell."

Concobar, though unwilling, yielded to that request.

Loegairey, the Victorious, son of Conud, son of Iliach, the second best knight of the Red Branch
and the most devoted to poetry of them all came that night into the hall while the rest slumbered.
The candles were flickering in their sockets. Darkness invested the rest of the vast hollow-sounding
chamber, but there was light around the throne and couch of the King, owing to the splendour
of the pillars and of the canopy shining with bronze, white and red, and silver and gold, and
glittering with carbuncles and diamonds, and owing to the light which always surrounded the
King and encircled his regal head like a luminous cloud, seen by many. He was looking straight
out before him with bright eyes, considering and consulting for the Red Branch while they slept.
Two great men having their swords drawn in their hands, stood behind him, on the right and
on the left, like statues, motionless and silent.

Loegairey drew nigh to the King. Distraction and amazement were in his face. His dense and
lustrous hair was dishevelled and in agitation round his neck and huge shoulders. He held in
his hand two long spears with rings of walrus tooth where the timber met the shank of the flashing
blades; they trembled in his hand. His lips were dry, his voice very low.

"There are horses in the stable of Macha," he said.

"I know it," answered the King.

Concobar called for water, and when he had washed his hands and his face, he took from its
place the chess-board of the realm, arranged the men, and observed their movements and combinations.
He closed the board and put the men in their net of bronze wire, and restored all to their place.

"Great things will happen on the morrow, O grandson of Iliach," he said. "Take candles and
go before me to the boys' dormitory."

They went to the boys' dormitory and to the couch of Cuculain. Cuculain and Laeg were asleep
together there. Their faces towards each other and their hair mingled together. Cuculain's
face was very tranquil, and his breathing inaudible, like an infant's.

"O sweet and serene face," murmured the King, "I see great clouds of sorrow coming upon you."

They returned to the hall.

"Go now to thy rest and thy slumber, O Loegairey," said the King. "When the curse of Macha
descends upon us I know one who will withstand it."

"Surely it is not that stripling?" said Loegairey. But the King made no answer.

On the morrow there was a great hosting of the Red Branch on the plain of the Assemblies. It
was May-Day morning and the sun shone brightly, but at first through radiant showers. The trees
were putting forth young buds; the wet grass sparkled. All the martial pomp and glory of the
Ultonians were exhibited that day. Their chariots and war-horses ringed the plain. All the
horses' heads were turned towards the centre where were Concobar Mac Nessa and the chiefs of
the Red Branch. The plain flashed with gold, bronze, and steel, and glowed with the bright
mantles of the innumerable heroes, crimson and scarlet, blue, green, or purple. The huge brooches
on their breasts of gold and silver or gold-like bronze, were like resplendent wheels. Their
long hair, yellow for the most part, was bound with ornaments of gold. Great, truly, were those
men, their like has not come since upon the earth. They were the heroes and demigods of the
heroic age of Erin, champions who feared nought beneath the sun, mightiest among the mighty,
huge, proud, and unconquerable, and loyal and affectionate beyond all others; all of the blood
of Ir, [Footnote: On account of their descent from Ir, son of Milesius, the Red Branch were
also called the Irians.] son of Milesius, the Clanna Rury of great renown, rejoicing in their
valour, their splendour, their fame and their peerless king. Concobar had no crown. A plain
circle of beaten gold girt his broad temples. In the naked glory of his regal manhood he stood
there before them all, but even so a stranger would have swiftly discovered the captain of
the Red Branch, such was his stature, his bearing, such his slowly-turning, steady- gazing
eyes and the majesty of his bearded countenance. His countenance was long, broad above and
narrow below, his nose eminent, his beard bipartite, curling and auburn in hue, his form without
any blemish or imperfection.

Cuculain came forth from the palace. He wore that day a short mantle of pale-red silk bordered
with white thread and fastened on the breast with a small brooch like a wheel of silver. The
hues upon that silk were never the same. His tunic of fine linen was girt at the waist with
a leathern zone, stained to the resemblance of the wild-briar rose. It descended to but did
not pass his beautiful knees, falling into many plaits. The tunic was cut low at the neck,
exposing his throat and the knot in the throat and the cup-shaped indentation above the breast.
On his feet were comely shoes sparkling with bronze plates. They took the colour of everything
which they approached. His hair fell in many curls over the pale-red mantle, without adornment
or confinement. It was the colour of the flower which is named after the dearest Disciple,
but which was called sovarchey by the Gael. A tinge of red ran through the gold. As to his
eyes, no two men or women could agree concerning their colour, for some said they were blue,
and some grey, and others hazel; and there were those who said that they were blacker than
the blackest night that was ever known. Yet again, there were those who said that they were
of all colours named and nameless. They were soft and liquid splendours, unfathomable lakes
of light above his full and ruddy cheeks, and beneath his curved and most tranquil brows. In
form he was symmetrical, straight and pliant as a young fir tree when the sweet spring sap
fills its veins. So he came to that assembly, in the glory of youth, beauty, strength, valour,
and beautiful shame- fastness, yet proud in his humility and glittering like the morning star.
Choice youths, his comrades, attended him. The kings held their breaths when he drew nigh,
moving white knee after white knee over the green and sparkling grass. When the other rites
had been performed and the due sacrifices and libations made, and after Cuculain had put his
right hand into the right hand of the King and become his man, Concobar gave him a shield,
two spears and a sword, weapons of great price and of thrice proved excellence--a strong man's
equipment. Cuculain struck the spears together at right angles and broke them. He clashed the
sword flat-wise on the shield. The sword leaped into small pieces and the shield was bent inwards
and torn.

"These are not good weapons, my King," said the boy. Then the King gave him others, larger
and stronger and worthy of his best champions. These, too, the boy broke into pieces in like
manner.

"Son of Nessa, these are still worse," he said, "nor is it well done, O Captain of the Red
Branch, to make me a laughing-stock in the presence of this great hosting of the Ultonians."

Concobar Mac Nessa exulted exceedingly when he beheld the amazing strength and the waywardness
of the boy, and beneath delicate brows his eyes glittered like glittering swords as he glanced
proudly round on the crowd of martial men that surrounded him. Amongst them all he seemed himself
a bright torch of valour and war, more pure and clear than polished steel. He then beckoned
to one of his knights, who hastened away and returned bringing Concobar's own shield and spears
and sword out of the Tec Brac, where they were kept, an equipment in reserve. And Cuculain
shook them and bent them and clashed them together, but they held firm.

"These are good arms, O son of Nessa," said Cuculain.

"Choose now thy charioteer," said the King, "for I will give thee also war-horses and a chariot."

He caused to pass before Cuculain all the boys who in many and severe tests had proved their
proficiency in charioteering, in the management and tending of steeds, in the care of weapons
and steed-harness, and all that related to charioteering science. Amongst them was Laeg, with
a pale face and dejected, his eyes red and his cheeks stained from much weeping. Cuculain laughed
when he saw him, and called him forth from the rest, naming him by his name with a loud, clear
voice, heard to the utmost limit of the great host.

"There was fear upon thee," said Cuculain.

"There is fear upon thyself," answered Laeg. "It was in thy mind that I would refuse."

"Nay, there is no such fear upon me," said Cuculain.

"Then there is fear upon me," said Laeg. "A charioteer needs a champion who is stout and a
valiant and faithful. Yea, truly there is fear upon me," answered Laeg.

"Verily, dear comrade and bed-fellow," answered Cuculain, "it is through me that thou shalt
get thy death-wound, and I say not this as a vaunt, but as a prophecy."

And that prophecy was fulfilled, for the spear that slew Laeg went through his master.

After that Laeg stood by Cuculain's side and held his peace, but his face shone with excess
of joy and pride. He wore a light graceful frock of deerskin, joined in the front with a twine
of bronze wire, and a short, dark-red cape, secured by a pin of gold with a ring to it. A band
of gold thread confined his auburn hair, rising into a peak behind his head. In his hands he
held a goad of polished red-yew, furnished with a crooked hand-grip of gold, and pointed with
shining bronze, and where the bronze met the timber there was a circlet of diamond of the diamonds
of Banba. He had also a short-handled scourge with a haft of walrus tooth, and the rope, cord,
and lash of that scourge were made of delicate and delicately-twisted thread of copper. This
equipment was the equipment of a proved charioteer; the apprentices wore only grey capes with
white fringes, fastened by loops of red cord.

Laeg was one of three brothers, all famous charioteers. Id and Sheeling were the others. They
were all three sons of the King of Gabra, whose bright dun arose upon a green and sloping hill
over against Tara towards the rising of the sun. Thence sprang the beautiful stream of the
Nemnich, rich in lilies and reeds and bulrushes, which to-day men call the Nanny Water. Laeg
was grey- eyed and freckled.

Then there were led forward by two strong knights a pair of great and spirited horses and a
splendid war-car. The King said, "They are thine, dear nephew. Well I know that neither thou,
nor Laeg, will be a dishonour to this war equipage."

Cuculain sprang into the car, and standing with legs apart, he stamped from side to side and
shook the car mightily, till the axle brake, and the car itself was broken in pieces.

"It is not a good chariot," said the lad.

Another was led forward, and he broke it in like manner.

"Give me a sound chariot, High Lord of the Clanna Rury, or give me none," he said. "No prudent
warrior would fight from such brittle foothold."

He brake in succession nine war chariots, the greatest and strongest in Emain. When he broke
the ninth the horses of Macha neighed from their stable. Great fear fell upon the host when
they heard that unusual noise and the reverberation of it in the woods and hills.

"Let those horses be harnessed to the Chariot of Macha," cried Concobar, "and let Laeg, son
of the King of Gabra, drive them hither, for those are the horses and that the chariot which
shall be given this day to Cuculain." 

"Just run to seed," he said to himself, bitterly, over and over; "just run to seed." Then he
went to sleep.

The following day he went down to the railroad. That was the last day. Next day he would be "off."
The train-master saw him and called him. A special was just going out. The Directors were going
over the road in the officers' car. Dick Rail was the engineer, and his fireman had been taken sick. Jim
must take the place. Jim had a mind not to do it. He hated Dick. He thought of how he had pursued
him. But he heard a voice behind him and turned. Carry was standing down the platform, talking
with some elderly gentlemen. She had on a travelling cap and ulster. She saw him and came forward--a
step:

"How do you do?" she held out her little gloved hand. She was going out over the road with
her father.

Jim took off his hat and shook hands with her. Dick Rail saw him, walked round the other side of
the engine, and tried to take off his hat like that. It was not a success; Dick knew it.

Jim went.

"Who was that?" one of the elderly gentlemen asked Carry.
"An old friend of mine--a gentleman," she said.

"Rather run to seed--hey?"
the old fellow quoted, without knowing exactly why; for he only half
recognized Jim, if he recognized him at all.

They started.

It was
a bad trip. The weather was bad, the road was bad, the engine bad;
Dick bad;--worse than all. Jim had a bad time: he was to be off when
he got home. What would his mother and Kitty do?

Once Carry came
(brought by the President) and rode in the engine for a little while.
Jim helped her up and spread his coat for her to sit on, put his overcoat
under her feet; his heart was in it. Dick was sullen, and Jim had
to show her about the engine.

The charioteer restrained the steeds before the assembly, but nay- the-less a deep purr, like
the purr of a tiger, proceeded from the axle. Then the whole assembly lifted up their voices
and shouted for Cuculain, and he himself, Cuculain, the son of Sualtam, sprang into his chariot,
all armed, with a cry as of a warrior springing into his chariot in the battle, and he stood
erect and brandished his spears, and the war sprites of the Gael shouted along with him, for
the Bocanahs and Bananahs and the Geniti Glindi, the wild people of the glens, and the demons
of the air, roared around him, when first the great warrior of the Gael, his battle-arms in
his hands, stood equipped for war in his chariot before all the warriors of his tribe, the
kings of the Clanna Rury and the people of Emain Macha. Then, too, there sounded from the Tec
Brac the boom of shields, and the clashing of swords and the cries and shouting of the Tuatha
De Danan, who dwelt there perpetually; and Lu the Long-Handed, the slayer of Balor, the destroyer
of the Fomoroh, the immortal, the invisible, the maker and decorator of the Firmament, whose
hound was the sun and whose son the viewless wind, thundered from heaven and bent his sling
five-hued against the clouds; and the son of the illimitable Lir [Footnote: Mananan mac Lir,
the sea-god.] in his mantle blue and green, foam-fringed passed through the assembly with a
roar of far-off innumerable waters, and the Mor Reega stood in the midst with a foot on either
side of the plain, and shouted with the shout of a host, so that the Ultonians fell down like
reaped grass with their faces to the earth, on account of the presence of the Mor Reega, and
on account of the omens and great signs. 

And one or two had some gush about the devotion of the beautiful young lady, the daughter of
one of the directors of the road, who happened to be on the train,
and who, "like a ministering angel, held the head of the wounded man
in her lap after he was taken from the wreck."

A good deal was made of this picture, which was extensively copied.

Dick Rail's account, after he had come back from carrying the broken body down to the old Upton
place in the country, and helping to lay it away in the old enclosure
under the big trees on the hill, was this:

"By ----!" he said, when
he stood in the yard, with a solemn-faced group around him, "we were
late, and I was just shaking 'em up.

I had been meaner'n hell to Jim all the trip (I didn't know him, and you all didn't neither),
and I was workin' him for all he was worth: I didn't give him a minute. The sweat was rolling
off him, and I was damnin' him with every shovelful.

We was runnin' under orders to make up, and we was just rounding
the curve this side of Ridge Hill, when Jim hollered.

He saw it as he raised up with the shovel in his hand to wipe the sweat off his face, and
he hollered to me, 'My God! Look, Dick!

Jump!'

"I looked and Hell was right there. He caught the lever and reversed, and put on the air and
sand before I saw it, and then grabbed me, and flung me clean out of the cab: 'Jump!' he says,
as he give me a swing. I jumped, expectin' of course he was comin' too; and as I lit, I saw
him turn and catch the lever. The old engine was jumpin' nigh off the track. But she was too
near. In she went, and the tender right on her. You may talk about his eyes bein' bad; but
by ----! when he gave me that swing, they looked to me like coals
of fire.

When we got him out 'twarn't Jim!


"There are two beardless youths in the chariot," answered the watchman, "but I am unable to
identify them on account of the dust and the rapid motion and the steam of the horses. I think
the charioteer is Laeg, the son of the King of Gabra, for I know his manner of driving. The
boy who sits in front of him and below him on the champion's seat I do not know, but he shines
like a star in the cloud of dust and steam." Then a young man who stood near to Conall Carna,
wearing a short, red cloak with a blue hood to it, and a tassel at the point of the hood, said
to Conall--

"If it be my brother that charioteers sure am I that it is Cuculain who is in the fighter's
seat, for many a time have I heard Laeg utter foul scorn of the Red Branch, none excepted,
when compared with Sualtam's son. For no other than him would he deign to charioteer. Truly
though he is my own brother there is not such a boaster in the North."

Then the watchman cried out again--

"Yea, the charioteer is the son of the King of Gabra, and it is Cuculain, the son of Sualtam,
who sits in the fighter's seat. He has Concobar's own shield on his breast, and his two spears
in his hand. Over Bray Ros, over Brainia, they are coming along the highway, by the foot of
the Town of the Tree; it is gifted with victories."

"Have done, O talkative man," cried Conall, "whose words are like the words of a seer, or the
full-voiced intonement of a chief bard."

When the chariot came to the ford, Conall was amazed at the horses and the chariot, but he
dissembled his amazement before his people, and when he saw Cuculain armed, he laughed and said,--

"Hath the boy indeed taken arms?"

And Cuculain said, "It is as thou seest, O son of Amargin; and moreover, I have sworn not to
let them back into the Chamber-of- Many-Colours [Footnote: Tec Brac or Speckled House, the
armoury of the Ultonians.] until I shall have first reddened them in the blood of the enemies
of Ulla."

Then Conall ceased laughing and said, "Not so, Setanta, for verily thou shalt not be permitted;"
and the great Champion sprang forward to lay his fearless, never-foiled, and all conquering
hands on the bridles of the horses, but at a nod from Cuculain, Laeg let the steeds go, and
Conall sprang aside out of the way, so terrible was the appearance of the horses as they reared
against him. "Harness my horses and yoke my chariot," cried Conall, "for if this mad boy goes
into the enemies' country and meets with harm there, verily I shall never be forgiven by the
Ultonians."

His horses were harnessed and his chariot yoked,--illustrious too were those horses, named
and famed in many songs--and Conall and Ide in their chariot dashed through the ford enveloped
with rainbow-painted clouds of foam and spray, and like hawks on the wing they skimmed the
plain, pursuing the boys. Laeg heard the roar and trampling, and looking back over his shoulder,
said,--

"They are after us, dear master, namely the great son of Amargin and my haughty brother Ide,
who hath ever borne himself to me as though I were a wayward child. They would spoil upon us
this our brave foray. But they will overtake the wind sooner than they will overtake the Liath
Macha and Black Shanglan, whose going truly is like the going of eagles. O storm-footed steeds,
great is my love for you, and inexpressible my pride in your might and your beauty, your speed
and your terror, and sweet docility and affection."

"Nevertheless, O Laeg," said Cuculain, "slacken now their going, for that Champion will be
an impediment to us in our challengings and our fightings; for when we stop for that purpose
he will overtake us, and, be our feats what they may, his and not ours will be the glory. Slacken
the going of the horses, for we must rid ourselves of the annoyance and the pursuit of these
gadflies."

Laeg slackened the pace, and as they went Cuculain leaped lightly from his seat and as lightly
bounded back again, holding a great pebble in his hand, such as a man using all his strength
could with difficulty raise from the ground, and sat still, rejoicing in his purpose, and grasping
the pebble with his five fingers.

Conall and Ide came up to them after that, and Conall, as the senior and the best man amongst
the Ultonians, clamorously called to them to turn back straightway, or he would hough their
horses, or draw the linch-pins of their wheels, or in some other manner bring their foray to
naught. Cuculain thereupon stood upright in the car, and so standing, with feet apart to steady
him in his throwing and in his aim, dashed the stone upon the yoke of Conall's chariot between
the heads of the horses and broke the yoke, so that the pole fell to the ground and the chariot
tilted forward violently. Then the charioteer fell amongst the horses, and Conall Carna, the
beauty of the Ultonians the battle-winning and ever-victorious son of Amargin, was shot out
in front upon the road, and fell there upon his left shoulder, and his beautiful raiment was
defiled with dust; and when he arose his left hand hung by his side, for the shoulder-bone
was driven from the socket, owing to the violence of the fall.

"I swear by all my gods," he cried, "that if a step would save thy head from the hands of the
men of Meath, I would not take it."

Cuculain laughed and replied, "Good, O Conall, and who asked thee to take it, or craved of
thee any succour or countenance? Was it a straight shot? Are there the materials of a fighter
in me at all, dost thou think? Thou art in my debt now too, O Conall. I have saved thee a broken
vow, for it is one of the oaths of our Order not to enter hostile territory with brittle chariot-gear!"

Then the boys laughed at him again, and Laeg let go the steeds, and very soon they were out
of sight. Conall returned slowly with his broken chariot to Ath-na-Forairey and sent for Fingin
of Slieve Fuad, who was the most cunning physician and most expert of bone-setters amongst
the Ultonians. Conall's messengers experienced no difficulty in finding the house of the leech,
which was very recognisable on account of its shape and appearance, and because it had wide
open doors, four in number, affording a liberal ingress and free thoroughfare to all the winds.
Also a stream of pure water ran through the house, derived from a well of healing properties,
which sprang from the side of the uninhabited hill. Such were the signs that showed the house
of a leech.

When they drew nigh they heard the voice of one man talking and of another who laughed. It
happened that that day there had been borne thither a champion, in whose body there was not
one small bone unbroken or uninjured. The man's bruises and fractures had been dressed and
set by Fingin and his intelligent and deft-handed apprentices, and he lay now in his bed of
healing listening joyfully to the conversation of the leech, who was beyond all others eloquent
and of most agreeable discourse.

When Conall's messengers related the reason of their coming, Fingin cried to his young men,
"Harness me my horses and yoke my chariot. There are few," he said, "in Erin for whom I would
leave my own house, but that youth is one of them. His father Amargin was well known to me.
He was a warrior grim and dour exceedingly, and he ever said concerning the boy, 'This hound's
whelp that I have gotten is too fine and sleek to hold bloody gaps or hunt down a noble prey.
He will be a women's playmate and not a peer amongst Heroes.' And that fear was ever upon him
till the day when Conall came red out of the Valley of the Thrush, and his track thence to
Rath-Amargin was one straight path of blood, and he with his shield-arm hacked to the bone,
his sword-arm swollen and bursting, and the flame of his valour burning bright in his splendid
eyes. Then, for the first time, the old man smiled upon him, and he said, 'That arm, my son,
has done a man's work to-day.'"

                  CAMPBELL.

As for the boys, they proceeded joyfully after that pleasant skirmish and friendly encounter,
both on account of the discomfiture of him who was reckoned the prime champion of the Ultonians,
and because they were at large in Erin, with no one to direct them, or to whom they should
render an account; and their happiness, too, was increased by the mettle, power and gallant
action of the steeds, and by the clanking of the harness and the brazen chains, and the ringing
of the weapons of war, and the roar of the revolving wheels, and owing to the velocity of their
motion and the rushing of the wind upon their temples and through their hair. 

Cool summer air blew in through the window, waving the pink nightshirt,
making goose flesh rise on the shapely white legs that wavered.

Then he moved down the ward, between the rows of beds, moving with uncertain, running, halting
steps. Upon the linoleum, his bare feet flapped in soft thumps, groping wildly, interfering,
knocking against each other. The man, trying to control them, gazed
in fright from side to side.

Down to the door he padded, rocked, swayed, turned and almost fell. Then back again he flapped.

Dense stillness in the ward, broken only by the hard, unsteady thumping of the bare feet. The
feet masterless, as the spirit had been masterless, years ago.

The three judges in white blouses stood with arms folded, motionless. The patients in the beds
sat up and tittered. The man who had been kicked by a horse raised himself and smiled. He who
had been knocked down by a despatch rider sat up, as did those with
bronchitis, and those with ptomaine poisoning.

They sat up, looked, and sniggered. They knew. So did André. So did the Paris surgeon, and the
little staff doctor, and the swarthy orderly and the priest-orderly. They all knew. The patient
knew too. The laughter of his comrades told him.

So he was to be released from the army, physically unfit. He could no longer serve his country.
For many months he had faced death under the guns, a glorious death.

Now he was to face death in another form. Not glorious, shameful. Only he didn't know much about
it, and couldn't visualize it--after all, he might possibly escape. He who had so loved life.
So he was rather pleased to be released from service.

The patients in the surrounding beds ceased laughing. They had other things to think about. As soon
as they were cured of the dysentery and of the itch, they were going
back again to the trenches, under the guns.

So they pitied themselves, and they rather envied him, being released from the army. They didn't
know much about it, either. They couldn't visualize an imbecile, degrading, lingering death.
They could only comprehend escape from sudden death, under the guns.

One way or another, it is about the same. Tragedy either way, and death either way. But the
tragedies of peace equal the tragedies of war. The sum total of suffering is the same. They balance
up pretty well.

PARIS, 18 June, 1916.

A SURGICAL TRIUMPH

In the Latin Quarter, somewhere about the intersection of the Boulevard Montparnasse with the rue
de Rennes--it might have been even a little way back of the Gare Montparnasse, or perhaps in
the other direction where the rue Vabin cuts into the rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs--any one who
knows the Quarter will know about it at once--there lived a little
hairdresser by the name of Antoine.

Some ten years ago Antoine had moved over from Montmartre, for he
was a good hairdresser and a thrifty soul, and he wanted to get on
in life, and at that time nothing seemed to him so profitable an investment
as to set up a shop in the neighbourhood patronized by Americans.

American students were always wanting their hair washed, so he was
told--once a week at least--and in that they differed from the Russian
and Polish and Roumanian and other students of Paris, a fact which
determined Antoine to go into business at the Montparnasse end of
the Quarter, rather than at the lower end, say round the Pantheon
and Saint-Etienne-du-Mont. And as he determined to put his prices
low, in order to catch the trade, so later on when his business thrived
enormously, he continued to keep them low, in order to maintain his
clients.

For if you once get used to having your hair washed for two francs, and very well done at that,
it is annoying to find that the price has gone up over night to the prices one pays on the Boulevard
Capucines. Therefore for ten years Antoine continued to wash hair at two francs a head, and
at the same time he earned quite a reputation for himself as a marvellous good person when it came
to waves and curls. So that when the war broke out, and his American clients broke and ran,
he had a neat, tidy sum saved up, and could be fairly complacent
about it all.

Moreover, he was a lame man, one leg being some three inches shorter
than the other, due to an accident in childhood, so he had never done
his military service in his youth, and while not over military age,
even yet, there was no likelihood of his ever being called upon to
do it.

So he stood in the doorway of his deserted shop, for all his young assistants, his curlers
and shampooers, had been mobilized, and looked up and down the deserted
street, and congratulated himself that he was not in as bad a plight,
financially and otherwise, as some of his neighbours.

Next door to him was a restaurant where the students ate, many of them. It had enjoyed a high
reputation for cheapness, up to the war, and twice a day had been
thronged with a mixed crowd of sculptors and painters and writers,
and just dilettantes, which latter liked to patronize it for what
they were pleased to call "local colour."

 Laeg saw the tokens of it, and feared and obeyed. Unwillingly he came down the slopes
of Slieve Modurn, and unwillingly harnessed the horses and yoked the chariot, and yoked the
horses. Southwards, then, they fared swiftly through the night, and the intervening nations
heard them as they went. When they arrived at the dun of the sons of Nectan it was twilight
and the dawning of the day. Before the dun there was a green and spacious lawn in full view
of the palace, and on the lawn a pillar and on the pillar a huge disc of shining bronze. Cuculain
descended and examined the disc, and there was inscribed on it in ogham a curse upon the man
who should enter that lawn and depart again without battle and single combat with the men of
the dun. Cuculain took the disc from its place and cast it from him southwards. The brazen
disc skimmed low across the plain and then soared on high until it showed to those who looked
a full, bright face, like the moon's, after which, pausing one moment, it fell sheer down and
sank into the dark waters of the Boyne, without a sound, or at all disturbing the tranquil
surface of the great stream, and was no more seen.

"That bright lure," said Cuculain, "shall no more be a cause of death to brave men. This lawn,
O Laeg, is surely the richest of all the lawns in the world. Close-enwoven and thick is the
mantle of short green grass which it wears, decked all over with red- petalled daisies and
bright flowers more numerous than the stars on a frosty night."

"That is not surprising," said Laeg, "for the lawn is enriched and made fat by the blood that
has been shed abundantly now for a long time, the blood of heroes and valiant men--slain here
by the people of the dun. Very rich too, are the men, both on account of their strippings of
the slain, and on account of the druidic well of magic which is within the dun. For the people
come from far and near to pay their vows at that well, and they give costly presents to those
sorcerers who are priests and custodians of the same."

"Noble, indeed, is the dun," said Cuculain. "But it is yet early, for the sun is not yet risen
from his red-flaming eastern couch, and the people of the dun, too, are in their heavy slumber.
I would repose now for a while and rest myself before the battles and hard combats which await
me this day. Wherefore, good Laeg, let down the sides and seats of the chariot, that I may
repose myself for a little and take a short sleep."

For just then precisely an unwonted drowsiness and desire for slumber possessed Cuculain.

"Witless and devoid of sense art thou," answered Laeg, "for who but an idiot would think of
sweet sleep and agreeable repose in a hostile territory, much more in full view of those who
look out from a foeman's dun, and that dun, Dun-Mic-Nectan?"

"Do as I bid thee," said Cuculain. "For one day, if for no other, thou shalt obey my commands."

Laeg unyoked the chariot and turned the great steeds forth to graze on the druidic lawn, which
was never done before at any time. He let down the chariot and arranged it as a couch, and
his young master laid himself therein, composing his limbs and pillowing tranquilly his head,
and he closed his immortal eyes. Very soon sweet slumber possessed him. Laeg meanwhile kept
watch and ward, and his great heart in his breast continually trembled like the leaf of the
poplar tree, or like a rush in a flooded stream. The awakening birds unconscious sang in the
trees, the dew glittered on the grass; hard by the royal Boyne rolled silently. The son of
Sualtam slumbered without sound or motion, and the charioteer stood beside him upright, like
a pillar, his grey bright eyes fixed upon the house of the sorcerers, the merciless, bloody,
and ever-victorious sons of Nectan, the son of Labrad.

Of the people of the dun, Foil, son of Nectan, was the first to awake. It was his custom to
wander forth by himself early in the morning, devising snares and stratagems by which he might
take and destroy men at his leisure. He was more cruel than anything. By him the great door
of the dun, bound and rivetted with brass, was flung open. With one hand he backshot the bar,
which rushed into its chamber with a roar and crash as of a great house when it falls, and
with the other he drew back the door. It grated on its brazen hinges, and on the iron threshold,
with a noise like thunder. Then Foil stood black and huge in the wide doorway of the dun, and
he looked at Laeg and Laeg looked at him. The man was ugly and fierce of aspect. His hair was
thick and black; he was bull-necked and large-eared. His mantle was black, bordered with dark
red; his tunic, a dirty yellow, was splashed with recent blood. There were great shoes on his
feet soled with wood and iron. In his hand he bore a staff of quick-beam, as it were a full-grown
tree without its branches. He being thus, strode forward in an ungainly manner to Laeg, and
with a surly voice bade him drive the horses off the lawn.

"Drive them off thyself," said Laeg.

He sought to do that, but owing to the behaviour of the steeds, he desisted right soon, and
turned again to Laeg.

"Who is the sleeping youth?" said he, "and wherefore hath he come hither in an evil hour?"

"He is a certain mild and gentle youth of the Ultonians," replied Laeg, "who yester morning
prosperously assumed his arms of chivalry for the first time, and hath come hither to prove
his valour upon the sons of Nectan."

"Many youths of his nation have come hither with the same intent," said the giant, "but they
did not return."

"This youth will," said Laeg, "after having slain the sons of Nectan, and after having sacked
their dun and burned it with fire."

Foil hearing that word became very angry, and he gripped his great staff and advanced to make
a sudden end of Laeg first, and then of the sleeper, Laeg, on his side, drew Cuculain's sword.
Hardly and using all his strength, could he do so and at the same time hold himself in an attitude
of defence and attack, but he succeeded. His aspect, too, was high and warlike, and his eyes
shone menacingly the while his heart trembled, for he knew too well that he was no match for
the man.

"Go back now for thy weapons of war," he cried, "and all thy war- furniture, and thy instruments
of sorcery and enchantment. Truly thou art in need of them all."

When Foil saw how the enormous sword flashed in the lad's hand, and saw the fierceness of his
visage and heard his menacing words, he returned to the dun. The people of the dun were now
awake, and they clustered like bees on the slope of the mound, and in the covered ways beneath
the eaves and along the rampart, and they hissed and roared and shouted words of insult and
contumely, lewd and gross, concerning Laeg and concerning that other youth who slept in such
a place and at such a time. But Laeg stood still and silent, with his eyes fixed on the dun,
and with the point of his sword leaning on the ground, for his right hand was weary on account
of its great weight. Very ardently he longed that his master should awake out of that unreasonable
slumber. Yet he made no attempt to rouse him, for it was unlawful to awake Cuculain when he
slept. Conspicuous amongst the people of the dun were Foil's brethren, Tuatha and Fenla, Tuatha
vast in bulk, and Fenla, tall and swift, wearing a mantle of pale blue. Around Fenla stood
the three cup-bearers, who drew water from the magic well, Flesc, Lesc, and Leam were their
names. At the same time that Foil reappeared in the doorway of the dun, fully armed and equipped
for battle, Cuculain awoke and sat up. At first he was dazed and bewildered, for divine voices
were sounding in his ears, and fleeting visionary presences were departing from him. Then he
heard the people how they shouted and saw his enemy descending the slope of the dun, sights
and sounds indeed diverse from those his dreams and visions. With a cry he started from his
bed, like a deer starting from his lair, and the people of the dun fell suddenly silent when
they beheld the velocity of his movements, the splendour of his beauty, and the rapidity with
which he armed himself and stood forth for war.

"That champion is Foil, son of Nectan," said Laeg, "and there is not one in the world with
whom it is more difficult to contend both in other respects and chiefly in this, that there
is but one weapon wherewith he may be slain. To all others he is invulnerable. That weapon
is an iron ball having magic properties, and no man knows where to look for it, or where the
man hath hidden it away. And O my dear master, thou goest forth to certain death going forth
against that man."

"Have no fear on that account," said Cuculain, "for it has been revealed to me where he hides
it. It is a ges to him to wear it always on his breast above his armour, but beneath his mantle
and tunic. There it is suspended by a strong chain of brass around his neck. With that ball
I shall slay him in the manner in which I have been directed by those who visited me while
I slept."

Then they fought, and in the first close so vehement was the onset of Foil, that Cuculain could
do no more than defend himself, and around the twain sparks flew up in showers as from a smithy
where a blacksmith and his lusty apprentices strongly beat out the red iron. The second was
similar to the first, and equally without results. New wants, developed in societies which had become
numerous, must have correspondingly multiplied the ideas of this dominant race, whose individuals
must have therefore gradually felt the need of fuller communication with each other. Hence the
necessity for increasing and varying the number of the signs suitable for mutual understanding.
It is plain therefore that incessant efforts would be made in this direction.[319]

"The lower animals, though often social, have been kept in too great subjection for any such development
of power. They continue, therefore, stationary as regards their wants and ideas, very few of
which need be communicated from one individual to another. A few
movements of the body, a few simple cries and whistles, or inflexions
of voice, would suffice for their purpose. With a crash and a ringing, armour and weapons, the giant fell upon the plain
and his blood poured forth in a torrent there where he himself invulnerable had shed the blood
of so many heroes. Laeg rejoiced greatly at that feat, and with a loud voice bade the men of
the dun bring forth their next champion. This was Tuatha the second son of Nectan, and the
fiercest of the three, he buffeted his esquires and gillas, while they armed him, so that it
was a sore task for them to clasp and strap and brace his armour upon him that day, for their
faces were bloody from his hands, and the floor of the armoury was strewn with their teeth.
That armour was a marvel and astonishment to all who saw it, so many thick, hard skins of wild
oxen of the mountains had been stitched together to furnish forth the champion's coat of mail.
It was strengthened, too, with countless bars and rings of brass sewed fast to it all over,
and it encompassed the whole of his mighty frame, from his shoulders to his feet. The helmet
and neckpiece were one, wrought in like manner, only stronger. The helmet covered his face.
There was no opening there save breathing slits and two round holes through which his eyes
shone terribly. On his feet were strong shoes bound with brass. To any other man but himself
this armour would have been an encumbrance, for it was good and sufficient loading for a car
drawn by one yoke of oxen; but so clad, this man was aware of no unusual weight. When they
had clasped him and braced him to his satisfaction, and, indeed, that was not easy, they put
upon him his tunic of dusky grey, and over that his mantle of dark crimson, and fastened it
on his breast with a brooch whose wheel alone would task one man's full strength to lift from
the ground.

Then Tuatha went forth out of the dun, and when his people saw him they shouted mightily, for
before that they had been greatly dismayed, and cast down on account of the slaying of Foil,
whom till then they had deemed invincible. They were all males dwelling here together in sorcery
and common lust for blood. No woman brightened their dark assemblies and the voice of a child
was never heard within the dun or around it. So they rejoiced greatly when they beheld Tuatha
and saw him how wrathfully he came forth, breathing slaughter, and heard his voice; for terribly
he shouted as he strode down from the dun, and he banned and cursed Cuculain and Laeg, and
devoted them to his gloomy gods. Beneath his feet the massive timbers of the drawbridge bent
and creaked.

Said Laeg, "This man, O dear Setanta, is far more terrible than the first, for he is said to
be altogether invulnerable and proof against any weapon that was ever made."

"It is not altogether thus," said Cuculain, "but if the man escapes the first stroke he is
thenceforward invincible, and surely slays his foe. Therefore give into my hand Concobar's
unendurable and mighty ashen spear, for I must make an end of him at one cast or not at all."

Tuatha now rushed upon Cuculain, flinging darts, of which he carried many in his left hand.
Not one of them did Cuculain attempt to take upon his shield, but altogether eluded them, for
now he swerved to one side and now to another, and now he dropped on one knee and again sprang
high in air, so that the missile hurtled and hissed between his gathered feet. Truly since
the beginning of the world there was not, and to the end of the world there will not be, a
better leaper than thy nursling, daughter of Cathvah; and behind him all the lawn was as it
were sown thick with spears, and these so buried in the earth that two-thirds of their length
was concealed and a third only projected slantwise from the green and glittering sward. When
the man with all his force, fury, and venom had discharged his last shaft and seen it, too,
shoot screaming beneath the aerial feet of the hero, he roared so terribly that the shores
and waters of the Boyne and the surrounding woods and groves returned a hollow moan, and, laying
his right hand on the hand-grip of his sword, he rushed upon Cuculain. At that moment Cuculain
poised the broad-bladed spear of Concobar Mac Nessa and cast it at the man, who was now very
near, and came rushing on like a storm, having his vast sword drawn and flashing. That cast
no one could rightly blame whether as to force or direction, for the brazen blade caught the
son of Nectan full on breast under the left pap and tore through his thick and strong armour
and burst three rib bones, and fixed itself in his heart, so that he fell first upon his knees,
stumbling forward, and then rolled over on the plain and a torrent of black blood gushed from
his mouth and nostrils.

"That was indeed a brave cast," said Laeg, "for the coat is the thickness of seven bulls' hides,
and plated besides, and the rib- bones, through which Concobar's great spear impelled by thee
hath burst his victorious way, are stronger than the thigh-bones of a horse; but pluck out
the spear now, for it is beyond my power to do so, and stand well upon thy guard, for the two
combats past will be as child's play to that which now awaits thee. Fenla, the third son of
Nectan, is preparing himself for battle. He is called the Swallow, because there is not a man
in the world swifter to retreat, or swifter to pursue. He is more at home in the water than
on the dry land, for through it he dives like a water-dog, and glides like an eel, and rushes
like a salmon when in the spring-time he seeks the upper pools. Greatly I fear that his challenge
and defiance will be to do battle with him there, where no man born of woman can meet him and
live." 

Old brown canvas sacks, bulging, muddy, worn, worn-out, like their owners. Tied on the outside
were water cans, and extra boots, and bayonets, and inside were socks and writing paper and
photographs of ugly wives. Therefore the ungainly sacks were precious, and they hugged them
with their tired feet, afraid that they might lose them.

Then finally the Major arrived, and began the business of sorting them. He was brisk and alert,
and he called them one by one to stand before him. They shuffled up to his little table, wavering,
deprecating, humble, and answered his brief impatient questions. And on the spot he made snap
diagnoses, such as rheumatism, bronchitis, kicked by a horse, knocked down by despatch rider,
dysentery, and so on--a paltry, stupid lot of ailments and minor
accidents, demanding a few days' treatment.

It was a dull service, this medical service, yet one had to be always on guard against contagion,
so the service was a responsible one. But the Major worked quickly, sorted them out hastily,
and then one by one they disappeared behind a hanging sheet, where the orderlies took off their
old uniforms, washed the patients a little, and then led them to the wards. It was a stupid service!
So different from that of the grands blessés!

There was some interest in that! But this éclopé business, these minor ailments, this stream
of petty sickness, petty accidents, dirty skin diseases, and vermin--all
war, if you like, but how banale!

* * * * *

Later, in the medical wards, the Major made his rounds, to inspect more carefully the men upon
whom he had made snap diagnoses, to correct the diagnosis, if need be, and to order treatment.
The chief treatment they needed was a bath, a clean bed, and a week of sleep, but the doctor,
being fairly conscientious, thought to hurry things a little, to hasten the return of these old,
tired men to the trenches, so that they might come back to the hospital again as grands blessés.
In which event they would be interesting. So he ordered ventouses or cupping, for the bronchitis
cases. There is much bronchitis in Flanders, in the trenches, because of the incessant Belgian
rain. They are sick with it too, poor devils. So said the Major to himself as he made his rounds.

Five
men here, lying in a row, all ptomaine poisoning, due to some rank tinned stuff they'd been
eating. Yonder there, three men with itch--filthy business! Their hands all covered with it,
tearing at their bodies with their black, claw-like nails! The orderlies had not washed them
very thoroughly--small blame to them! So the Major made his rounds, walking slowly, very bored,
but conscientious. These dull wrecks were needed in the trenches.
He must make them well.

At Bed 9, André stopped. Something different
this time? He tried to recall it. Oh yes--in the sorting tent he'd
noticed----

"Monsieur Major!" A thin hand, clean and slim, rose to
the salute. The bed covers were very straight, sliding neither to
this side nor to that, as covers slide under restless pain. When the
people of the dun saw that, they brake forth west-ward and fled. Then Cuculain and Laeg invaded
the dun, and they burst open the doors of the strong chambers, and of the dungeons beneath
the earth, and let loose the prisoners and the hostages and the prepared victims, and they
broke the idols and the instruments of sorcery, and filled in the well. After that they replenished
the vacant places of the war-car with things the most precious and such as were portable, and
gave all the rest to the liberated captives for a prey. Last of all they applied fire to the
vast dun, and quickly the devouring flames shot heavenward, fed with pine and red yew, and
rolled forth a mighty pillar of black smoke, reddened with rushing sparks and flaming embers.
The men of Tara saw it, and the men of Tlatga, and of Tailteen, and of Ben-Eadar, and they
consulted their prophets and wizards as to what this portent might mean, for it was not a little
smoke that the burning of Dun-Mic-Nectan sent forth that day.

                      SHELLEY.

Then Laeg harnessed the horses and yoked the chariot. To the brazen peaks of the chariot he
fastened the heads of Foil and of Tuatha, with Foil's on the left hand and Tuatha's on the
right; and the long-haired head of the water-wizard he made fast by its own hair to the ornament
of silver that was at the forward extremity of the great chariot pole. When this was done,
and when he had secured his master's weapons and warlike equipments in their respective places,
the youths ascended the chariot, and Laeg shook the ringing reins and called to the steeds
to go, and they went, and soon they were on the hard highway straining forward to the north.
The sound of the war-car behind them outroared the roaring of the flames. Cuculain was a pale
red all over, for ere the last combat was at an end that pool of the Boyne was like one bath
of blood. His eyes blazed terribly in his head, and his face was fearful to look upon. Like
a reed in a river so he quaked and trembled, and there went out from him a moaning like the
moaning of winds through deep woods or desolate glens, or over the waste places of the earth
when darkness is abroad. For the war-fury which the Northmen named after the Barserkers enwrapped
and inflamed him, body and spirit, owing to those strenuous combats, and owing to the venom
and the poison which exhaled from those children of sorcery, that spawn of Death and Hell,
so that his gentle mind became as it were the meeting-place of storms and the confluence of
shouting seas. A man ran before him whose bratta on the wind roared like fire, and there was
a sound of voices calling and acclaiming, and a noontide darkness descended upon him and accompanied
him as he went, and all became obscure and shapeless, and all the ways were murk. And the mind
of Laeg, too, was disturbed and shaken loose from its strong foundations.

"But now," said Cuculain, "there ran a man before us. Him I do not see, but what is this herd
of monstrous deer, sad-coloured and livid, as with horns and hoofs of iron? I have not seen
such at any time. Lurid fire plays round them as they flee."

"No deer of the earth are they," said Laeg. "They are the enchanted herd of Slieve Fuad, and
from their abode subterrene they have come up late into the world surrounded by night that
they may graze upon Eiriu's plains, and it is not lawful even to look upon them."

"Pursue and run down those deer," said Cuculain.

"There is fear upon me," said Laeg.

"Alive or dead thou shalt come with me on this adventure, though it lead us into the mighty
realms of the dead," cried Cuculain.

Laeg relaxed his hands upon the reins and let the steeds go, and they chased the enchanted
herd of Slieve Fuad. There was no hunting seen like that before in Erin. So vehement was the
chase that a twain of the herd was run down and they upon their knees and sobbing. Cuculain
sprang from the chariot and he made fast one of the deer to the pole of the chariot to run
before, and on to the hinder part of it to run behind. So they went northward again with a
deer of the herd of Hell running before them and another following behind.

"What are those birds whiter than snow and more brilliant than stars," said then Cuculain,
"which are before us upon the plain, as if Heaven with its astral lights and splendour were
outspread before us there?"

"They are the wild geese of the enchanted flocks of Lir," answered Laeg. "From his vast and
ever-during realms beneath the sea they have come up through the dim night to feed on Banba's
plains. Have nought to do with those birds, dear master."

Cuculain stood up in his chariot with his sling in his hand, and he fitted thereto small bolts,
and slang. He did not make an end before he had overthrown and laid low three score of the
birds of Lir.

"Go bring me those birds," said he to Laeg. The horses were plunging terribly when he said that.

"I may not, O my master," said Laeg. Such an animal was domesticated by early man, taken at successive
intervals into widely different climates, trained to different habits, carried by man in his migrations
as a precious capital into the most distant countries, and crossed from time to time with other
breeds which had been developed in similar ways. Hence our present multiform breeds."[283]

Here, also, it is impossible to forget Buffon's passages on the dog,
given pp. 121, 122. See also p. 223.

Forthwith Cuculain sprang out in front of the chariot, and seized them by their mouths and
they in their rearing, and with his hands bowed down their heads to the earth, and they knew
their master and stood still while they quaked. Laeg collected the birds, and Cuculain secured
them to the chariot and to the harness. The birds returned to life and Cuculain cut the binding
cords, so that the birds flew over and on either side of the chariot, and singing besides.

In that manner, speeding northward, Cuculain and Laeg drew nigh to Emain Macha. Concobar and
the Ultonians happened at that very time to be seeking a druidic response from the prophetess
Lavarcam concerning Cuculain and concerning Laeg, for their minds misgave them that beyond
the mearings of the Province the lads had come to some hurt, and Lavarcam, answering them, said:

"Look to yourselves now ye children of Rury, Your destruction and the end of your career are
at hand. Close all gates, shoot every bar. For Dethcaen's nursling, Sualtam's son, draweth nigh.

Verily he is not hurt, but he hath wounded. Champions the mightiest he hath victoriously overthrown.
Though he come swiftly it is not in flight. Take good heed now while there is time. He cometh
like night in raiment of darkness, Starry singing flocks are round his head, Soon, O Concobar,
his unendurable hand will he upon you; Soon your dead will outnumber your living."

"Close all the gates of Emain," cried Concobar, "and treble-bar all with bars. Look to your
weapons ye heroes of the Red Branch. Man the ramparts, and let every bridge be raised."

So the high king shouted, and his voice rang through the vast and high dun and rolled along
the galleries and far-stretching corridors, and was heard by the women of Ulla in their secluded
chambers. And at the same time the watchman from the watch-tower cried out. Then the women
held council together, and they said:

"Moats and ramparts and strong doors will not repel Cuculain. The sick men and the slightly wounded
could sit very well on the backless benches till the Médecin Major
had time to come and examine them.

Quite a company of "sitters" were assembled here one morning, helped out of two big ambulances
that drove in within ten minutes of each other. They were a dejected lot, and they stumbled into
the tent unsteadily, groping towards the benches, upon which they tried to pose their weary,
old, fevered bodies in comfortable attitudes.

And as it couldn't be done, there was a continual shifting movement, and unrest. Heavy legs
in heavy wet boots were shoved stiffly forward, then dragged back
again. Old, thin bodies bent forward, twisted sideways, coarse, filthy
hands hung supine between spread knees, and then again the hands would
change, and support whiskered, discouraged faces.

They bade all the men retire into the dun after they had lowered the bridge; and when that
was done three tens of them, such as were the most illustrious in rank and famous for accomplishments,
and they all in the prime of their youth and beauty, and clad only in the pure raiment of their
womanhood, came forth out of the quarters of the women, and in that order, in spite of shame
they went to meet him. When Cuculain saw them advancing towards him in lowly wise, with exposed
bosom and hands crossed on their breasts, his weapons fell from his hands and the war-demons
fled out of him, and low in the chariot he bent down his noble head. The same hot operating rooms,
the same beds, always full, in the wards. This is war. But it goes on and on, over and over,
day after day, till it seems like life. Life in peace time. It might be life in a big city
hospital, so alike is the routine.

When he had entered his bath the water boiled around him. After he had bathed and when he became
calm and cool Laeg put upon him his beautiful banqueting attire, and he came into the great
hall lowly and blushing. All were acclaiming and praising him, and he passed up the great hall
and made a reverence to the King, and he sat down at the King's footstool. All who saw him
marvelled then more at his beauty than at his deeds. He was sick after that, and came very
near to death, but in the end he fell into a very deep sleep from which he awoke whole and
refreshed, though it was the opinion of many that he would surely die. Cuculain was seventeen
years of age when he did these feats.

