THE PROSE WORKS OF JONATHAN SWIFT

VOL. Like most titles whose aim is to express in modern words the character and achievements
of a man of a past age, this phrase is not of the happiest. Applied to so extraordinary a man
as Jonathan Swift, it is both misleading and inadequate. At best it embodies but a half-truth.
It belongs to that class of phrases which, in emphasizing a particular side of the character,
sacrifices truth to a superficial cleverness, and so does injustice to the character as a whole.
The vogue such phrases obtain is thus the measure of the misunderstanding that is current;
so that it often becomes necessary to receive them with caution and to test them with care.

A prince in his art Swift certainly was, but his art was not the art of the journalist. Swift
was a master of literary expression, and of all forms of that expression which aim at embodying
in language the common life and common facts of men and their common nature. He had his limitations,
of course; but just here lies the power of his special genius. He never attempted to express
what he did not fully comprehend. If he saw things narrowly, he saw them definitely, and there
was no mistaking the ideas he wished to convey. "He understands himself," said Dr. Johnson,
"and his reader always understands him." Within his limitations Swift swayed a sovereign power.
His narrowness of vision, however, did never blind him to the relations that exist between
fact and fact, between object and subject, between the actual and the possible. At the same
time it was not his province, as it was not his nature, to handle such relations in the abstract.
The bent of his mind was towards the practical and not the pure reason. The moralist and the
statesman went hand in hand in him--an excellent example of the eighteenth century thinker.

But to say this of Swift is not to say that he was a journalist. The journalist is the man
of the hour writing for the hour in harmony with popular opinion. Both his text and his heads
are ready-made for him. He follows the beaten road, and only essays new paths when conditions
have become such as to force him along them. Such a man Swift certainly was not. Journalism
was not his way to the goal. If anything, it was, as Epictetus might have said, but a tavern
by the way-side in which he took occasion to find the means by which the better to attain his
goal. If Swift's contributions to the literature of his day be journalism, then did journalism
spring full-grown into being, and its history since his time must be considered as a history
of its degeneration. But they were much more than journalism. That they took the form they
did, in contributions to the periodicals of his day, is but an accident which does not in the
least affect the contributions themselves. These, in reality, constitute a criticism of the
social and political life of the first thirty years of the English eighteenth century. From
the time of the writing of "A Tale of a Tub" to the days of the Drapier's Letters, Swift dissected
his countrymen with the pitiless hand of the master-surgeon. So profound was his knowledge
of human anatomy, individual and social, that we shudder now at the pain he must have inflicted
in his unsparing operations. So accurate was his judgment that we stand amazed at his knowledge,
and our amazement often turns to a species of horror as we see the cuticle flapped open revealing
the crude arrangement beneath. Nor is it to argue too nicely, to suggest that our present sympathy
for the past pain, our amazement, and our horror, are, after all, our own unconscious tributes
to the power of the man who calls them up, and our confession of the lasting validity of his
criticism.

This is not the power nor is it the kind of criticism that are the elements of the art of the
journalist. Perhaps we should be glad that it is not; which is but to say that we are content
with things as they exist. It requires a special set of conditions to precipitate a Swift.
Happily, if we will have it so, the conditions in which we find ourselves ask for that kind
of journalist whose function is amply fulfilled when he has measured the movements of the hour
by the somewhat higher standards of the day. The conditions under which Swift lived demanded
a journalist of an entirely different calibre; and they got him. They obtained a man who dissolved
the petty jealousies of party power in the acid of satire, and who distilled the affected fears
for Church and State in the alembic of a statesmanship that establishes a nation's majesty
and dignity on the common welfare of its free people. When Swift, at the beginning of the November
of 1710, was called in to assist the Tory party by undertaking the work of "The Examiner,"
he found a condition of things so involved and so unstable, that it required the very nicest
appreciation, the most delicate handling, and the boldest of hearts to readjust and re-establish,
without fearful consequences. Harley and St. John were safely housed, and, apparently, amply
protected by a substantial majority. But majorities are often not the most trustworthy of supports.
Apart from the over-confidence which they inspire, and apart from the danger of a too-enthusiastic
following, such as found expression in the October Club, there was the danger which might come
from the dissatisfaction of the people at large, should their temper be wrongly gauged; and
at this juncture it was not easy to gauge. The popularity of Marlborough and his victories,
on the one hand, was undoubted. On the other, however, there was the growing opinion that those
victories had been paid for at a price greater than England could afford. If she had gained
reputation and prestige, these could not fill the mouths of the landed class, gradually growing
poorer, and the members of this class were not of a disposition to restrain their feelings
as they noted the growing prosperity of the Whig stock-jobbers--a prosperity that was due to
the very war which was beggaring them. If the landed man cried for peace, he was answered by
the Whig stock-jobber that peace meant the ultimate repudiation of the National Debt, with
the certainty of the reign of the Pretender. If the landed man spoke for the Church, the Whig
speculator raised the shout of "No Popery!" The war had transformed parties into factions,
and the ministry stood between a Scylla of a peace-at-any-price, on the one side, and a Charybdis
of a war-at-any-price on the other; or, if not a war, then a peace so one-sided that it would
be almost impossible to bring it about.

In such troubled waters, and at such a critical juncture, it was given to Swift to act as pilot
to the ship of State. His papers to "The Examiner" must bear witness to the skill with which
he accomplished the task set before him. His appeal to the people of England for confidence
in the ministry, should be an appeal not alone on behalf of its distinguished and able members,
but also on behalf of a policy by which "the crooked should be made straight and the rough
places plain." Such was to be the nature of his appeal, and he made it in a series of essays
that turned every advantage with admirable effect to the side of his clients. Not another man
then living could have done what he did; and we question if either Harley or St. John ever
realized the service he rendered them. The later careers of these two men furnish no doubtful
hints of what might have happened at this period had Swift been other than the man he was.

