It is quite justifiable for us British, no doubt, if we do really play the part of honest trustees,
to remain in Egypt and in India under existing conditions; it is even possible for us to glance
at the helplessness of Arabia, Palestine, and Mesopotamia, as yet incapable of self-government,
helpless as new-born infants. But our case, our only justifiable case, is that we are trustees
because there is no better trustee possible. And the creation of a council of a League of Free
Nations would be like the creation of a Public Trustee for the world. The creation of a League
of Free Nations must necessarily be the creation of an authority that may legitimately call
existing empires to give an account of their stewardship. For an unchecked fragmentary control
of tropical and chaotic regions, it substitutes the possibility of a general authority. And
this must necessarily alter the problems not only of the politically immature nations and the
control of the tropics, but also of the regulation of the sea ways, the regulation of the coming
air routes, and the distribution of staple products in the world. I will not go in detail over
the items of this list, because the reader can fill in the essentials of the argument from
what has gone before. I want simply to suggest how widely this project of a League of Free
Nations swings when once you have let it swing freely in your mind! Many a time have I seen a
gentleman shrink from saluting a brilliant lady, as though it was
a death's head he were compelled to kiss.

The secret was that her face and lips were bedaubed with paints.

A violently rouged woman is a disgusting sight. The excessive red on the face gives a coarseness
to every feature, and a general fierceness to the countenance, which transforms the elegant
lady of fashion into a vulgar harridan. But, in no case, can even
rouge be used by ladies who have passed the age of life when roses
are natural to the cheek. And, moreover, this idea queries the adjective of Belgian,
Portuguese, French, and British Central Africa alike, just as emphatically as it queries "German."
Still more effectually does the League forbid those creations of the futurist imagination,
the imperialism of Italy and Greece, which make such threatening gestures at the world of our
children. Are these incompatibilities understood? Until people have faced the clear antagonism
that exists between imperialism and internationalism, they have not begun to suspect the real
significance of this project of the League of Free Nations. They have not begun to realize
that peace also has its price.

IV

THE LABOUR VIEW OF MIDDLE AFRICA

I was recently privileged to hear the views of one of those titled and influential ladies--with
a general education at about the fifth standard level, plus a little French, German, Italian,
and music--who do so much to make our England what it is at the present time, upon the Labour
idea of an international control of "tropical" Africa. She was loud and derisive about the
"ignorance" of Labour. "What can they know about foreign politics?" she said, with gestures
to indicate her conception of them.

I was moved to ask her what she would do about Africa. "Leave it to Lord Robert!" she said,
leaning forward impressively. "Leave it to the people who know."

Unhappily I share the evident opinion of Labour that we are not blessed with any profoundly
wise class of people who have definite knowledge and clear intentions about Africa, that these
"people who know" are mostly a pretentious bluff, and so, in spite of a very earnest desire
to take refuge in my "ignorance" from the burthen of thinking about African problems, I find
myself obliged, like most other people, to do so. In the interests of our country, our children,
and the world, we common persons have to have opinions about these matters. A muddle-up in
Africa this year may kill your son and mine in the course of the next decade. I know this is
not a claim to be interested in things African, such as the promoter of a tropical railway
or an oil speculator has; still it is a claim. And for the life of me I cannot see what is
wrong about the Labour proposals, or what alternative exists that can give even a hope of peace
in and about Africa. 

Reserved seats, 3s.; unreserved, 2s. 6d.

The début would appear to have been highly successful. "The announcement of the lecture," said
a report the next morning, "created a degree of interest almost unparalleled
among the Dublin public. But I think these gentlemen have not perhaps
given the Labour proposal quite as much attention as they have spent upon the details of African
conditions. I think they have jumped to conclusions at the mere sound of the word "international."
There have been some gross failures in the past to set up international administrations in
Africa and the Near East. And these gentlemen think at once of some new Congo administration
and of nondescript police forces commanded by cosmopolitan adventurers. (See Joseph Conrad's
"Out-post of Civilization.") They think of internationalism with greedy Great Powers in the
background outside the internationalized area, intriguing to create disorder and mischief with
ideas of an ultimate annexation. But I doubt if such nightmares do any sort of justice to the
Labour intention.

And the essential thing I would like to point out to these authorities upon African questions
is that not one of them even hints at any other formula which covers the broad essentials of
the African riddle.

What are these broad essentials? What are the ends that must be achieved if Africa is not to
continue a festering sore in the body of mankind?

The first most obvious danger of Africa is the militarization of the black. General Smuts has
pointed this out plainly. The negro makes a good soldier; he is hardy, he stands the sea, and
he stands cold. (There was a negro in the little party which reached the North Pole.) It is
absolutely essential to the peace of the world that there should be no arming of the negroes
beyond the minimum necessary for the policing of Africa. But how is this to be watched and
prevented if there is no overriding body representing civilization to say "Stop" to the beginnings
of any such militarization? I do not see how Sir Harry Johnston, Sir Alfred Sharpe, and the
other authorities can object to at least an international African "Disarmament Commission"
to watch, warn, and protest. At least they must concede that.

But in practice this involves something else. A practical consequence of this disarmament idea
must be an effective control of the importation of arms into the "tutelage" areas of Africa. All
being in readiness, the public were duly informed of her plans by an advertisement:
MADAME LOLA MONTEZ, COUNTESS OF LANDSFELD, will give a Lecture on
"America and its People," at the Round Room, Rotundo, on Wednesday
evening, December 8. A Disarmament
Commission that has no forces available to prevent the arms trade will be just another Hague
Convention, just another vague, well-intentioned, futile gesture.

