SOUTH SEA TALES

By Jack London

CONTENTS

The House of Mapuhi

The Whale Tooth

Mauki

"Yah! Yah! Yah!"

The Heathen

The Terrible Solomons

The Inevitable White Man

The Seed of McCoy

THE HOUSE OF MAPUHI

Despite the heavy clumsiness of her lines, the Aorai handled easily in the light breeze, and
her captain ran her well in before he hove to just outside the suck of the surf. The atoll
of Hikueru lay low on the water, a circle of pounded coral sand a hundred yards wide, twenty
miles in circumference, and from three to five feet above high-water mark. On the bottom of
the huge and glassy lagoon was much pearl shell, and from the deck of the schooner, across
the slender ring of the atoll, the divers could be seen at work. But the lagoon had no entrance
for even a trading schooner. With a favoring breeze cutters could win in through the tortuous
and shallow channel, but the schooners lay off and on outside and sent in their small boats.

The Aorai swung out a boat smartly, into which sprang half a dozen brown-skinned sailors clad
only in scarlet loincloths. They took the oars, while in the stern sheets, at the steering
sweep, stood a young man garbed in the tropic white that marks the European. The golden strain
of Polynesia betrayed itself in the sun-gilt of his fair skin and cast up golden sheens and
lights through the glimmering blue of his eyes. Raoul he was, Alexandre Raoul, youngest son
of Marie Raoul, the wealthy quarter-caste, who owned and managed half a dozen trading schooners
similar to the Aorai. Across an eddy just outside the entrance, and in and through and over
a boiling tide-rip, the boat fought its way to the mirrored calm of the lagoon. Young Raoul
leaped out upon the white sand and shook hands with a tall native. The man's chest and shoulders
were magnificent, but the stump of a right arm, beyond the flesh of which the age-whitened
bone projected several inches, attested the encounter with a shark that had put an end to his
diving days and made him a fawner and an intriguer for small favors.

"Have you heard, Alec?" were his first words. "Mapuhi has found a pearl--such a pearl. Never
was there one like it ever fished up in Hikueru, nor in all the Paumotus, nor in all the world.
Buy it from him. He has it now. And remember that I told you first. He is a fool and you can
get it cheap. Have you any tobacco?"

Straight up the beach to a shack under a pandanus tree Raoul headed. He was his mother's supercargo,
and his business was to comb all the Paumotus for the wealth of copra, shell, and pearls that
they yielded up.

He was a young supercargo, it was his second voyage in such capacity, and he suffered much
secret worry from his lack of experience in pricing pearls. But when Mapuhi exposed the pearl
to his sight he managed to suppress the startle it gave him, and to maintain a careless, commercial
expression on his face. For the pearl had struck him a blow. It was large as a pigeon egg,
a perfect sphere, of a whiteness that reflected opalescent lights from all colors about it.
It was alive. Never had he seen anything like it. When Mapuhi dropped it into his hand he was
surprised by the weight of it. That showed that it was a good pearl. He examined it closely,
through a pocket magnifying glass. It was without flaw or blemish. The purity of it seemed
almost to melt into the atmosphere out of his hand. In the shade it was softly luminous, gleaming
like a tender moon. So translucently white was it, that when he dropped it into a glass of
water he had difficulty in finding it. So straight and swiftly had it sunk to the bottom that
he knew its weight was excellent.

"Well, what do you want for it?" he asked, with a fine assumption of nonchalance.

"I want--" Mapuhi began, and behind him, framing his own dark face, the dark faces of two women
and a girl nodded concurrence in what he wanted. Their heads were bent forward, they were animated
by a suppressed eagerness, their eyes flashed avariciously.

"I want a house," Mapuhi went on. "It must have a roof of galvanized iron and an octagon-drop-clock.
It must be six fathoms long with a porch all around. A big room must be in the centre, with
a round table in the middle of it and the octagon-drop-clock on the wall. There must be four
bedrooms, two on each side of the big room, and in each bedroom must be an iron bed, two chairs,
and a washstand. And back of the house must be a kitchen, a good kitchen, with pots and pans
and a stove. And you must build the house on my island, which is Fakarava."

"Is that all?" Raoul asked incredulously.

"There must be a sewing machine," spoke up Tefara, Mapuhi's wife.

"Not forgetting the octagon-drop-clock," added Nauri, Mapuhi's mother.

"Yes, that is all," said Mapuhi.

Young Raoul laughed. He laughed long and heartily. But while he laughed he secretly performed
problems in mental arithmetic. He had never built a house in his life, and his notions concerning
house building were hazy. While he laughed, he calculated the cost of the voyage to Tahiti
for materials, of the materials themselves, of the voyage back again to Fakarava, and the cost
of landing the materials and of building the house. It would come to four thousand French dollars,
allowing a margin for safety--four thousand French dollars were equivalent to twenty thousand
francs. It was impossible. How was he to know the value of such a pearl? Twenty thousand francs
was a lot of money--and of his mother's money at that.

"Mapuhi," he said, "you are a big fool. Set a money price."

But Mapuhi shook his head, and the three heads behind him shook with his.

"I want the house," he said. "It must be six fathoms long with a porch all around--"

"Yes, yes," Raoul interrupted. "I know all about your house, but it won't do. I'll give you
a thousand Chili dollars."

The four heads chorused a silent negative.

"And a hundred Chili dollars in trade."

"I want the house," Mapuhi began.

"What good will the house do you?" Raoul demanded. "The first hurricane that comes along will
wash it away. You ought to know."

"Captain Raffy says it looks like a hurricane right now."

"Not on Fakarava," said Mapuhi. "The land is much higher there. On this island, yes. Any hurricane
can sweep Hikueru. I will have the house on Fakarava. It must be six fathoms long with a porch
all around--"

And Raoul listened again to the tale of the house. Several hours he spent in the endeavor to
hammer the house obsession out of Mapuhi's mind; but Mapuhi's mother and wife, and Ngakura,
Mapuhi's daughter, bolstered him in his resolve for the house. Through the open doorway, while
he listened for the twentieth time to the detailed description of the house that was wanted,
Raoul saw his schooner's second boat draw up on the beach. The sailors rested on the oars,
advertising haste to be gone. The first mate of the Aorai sprang ashore, exchanged a word with
the one-armed native, then hurried toward Raoul. The day grew suddenly dark, as a squall obscured
the face of the sun. Across the lagoon Raoul could see approaching the ominous line of the
puff of wind.

"Captain Raffy says you've got to get to hell outa here," was the mate's greeting. "If there's
any shell, we've got to run the risk of picking it up later on--so he says. The barometer's
dropped to twenty-nine-seventy."

The gust of wind struck the pandanus tree overhead and tore through the palms beyond, flinging
half a dozen ripe cocoanuts with heavy thuds to the ground. Then came the rain out of the distance,
advancing with the roar of a gale of wind and causing the water of the lagoon to smoke in driven
windrows. The sharp rattle of the first drops was on the leaves when Raoul sprang to his feet.

"A thousand Chili dollars, cash down, Mapuhi," he said. "And two hundred Chili dollars in trade."

"I want a house--" the other began.

"Mapuhi!" Raoul yelled, in order to make himself heard. "You are a fool!"

He flung out of the house, and, side by side with the mate, fought his way down the beach toward
the boat. They could not see the boat. The tropic rain sheeted about them so that they could
see only the beach under their feet and the spiteful little waves from the lagoon that snapped
and bit at the sand. A figure appeared through the deluge. It was Huru-Huru, the man with the
one arm.

"Did you get the pearl?" he yelled in Raoul's ear.

"Mapuhi is a fool!" was the answering yell, and the next moment they were lost to each other
in the descending water.

Half an hour later, Huru-Huru, watching from the seaward side of the atoll, saw the two boats
hoisted in and the Aorai pointing her nose out to sea. And near her, just come in from the
sea on the wings of the squall, he saw another schooner hove to and dropping a boat into the
water. He knew her. It was the OROHENA, owned by Toriki, the half-caste trader, who served
as his own supercargo and who doubtlessly was even then in the stern sheets of the boat. Huru-Huru
chuckled. He knew that Mapuhi owed Toriki for trade goods advanced the year before.

The squall had passed. The hot sun was blazing down, and the lagoon was once more a mirror.
But the air was sticky like mucilage, and the weight of it seemed to burden the lungs and make
breathing difficult.

"Have you heard the news, Toriki?" Huru-Huru asked. Mapuhi is a fool. Besides, he owes you
money. Remember that I told you first. Have you any tobacco?"

And to the grass shack of Mapuhi went Toriki. He was a masterful man, withal a fairly stupid
one. Carelessly he glanced at the wonderful pearl--glanced for a moment only; and carelessly
he dropped it into his pocket.

"You are lucky," he said. "It is a nice pearl. I will give you credit on the books."

"I want a house," Mapuhi began, in consternation. "It must be six fathoms--"

"Six fathoms your grandmother!" was the trader's retort. "You want to pay up your debts, that's
what you want. You owed me twelve hundred dollars Chili. Very well; you owe them no longer.
The amount is squared. Besides, I will give you credit for two hundred Chili. If, when I get
to Tahiti, the pearl sells well, I will give you credit for another hundred--that will make
three hundred. But mind, only if the pearl sells well. I may even lose money on it."

Mapuhi folded his arms in sorrow and sat with bowed head. He had been robbed of his pearl.
In place of the house, he had paid a debt. There was nothing to show for the pearl.

"You are a fool," said Tefara.

"You are a fool," said Nauri, his mother. "Why did you let the pearl into his hand?"

"What was I to do?" Mapuhi protested. "I owed him the money. He knew I had the pearl. You heard
him yourself ask to see it. I had not told him. He knew. Somebody else told him. And I owed
him the money."

"Mapuhi is a fool," mimicked Ngakura.

She was twelve years old and did not know any better. Mapuhi relieved his feelings by sending
her reeling from a box on the ear; while Tefara and Nauri burst into tears and continued to
upbraid him after the manner of women.

Huru-Huru, watching on the beach, saw a third schooner that he knew heave to outside the entrance
and drop a boat. It was the Hira, well named, for she was owned by Levy, the German Jew, the
greatest pearl buyer of them all, and, as was well known, Hira was the Tahitian god of fishermen
and thieves.

"Have you heard the news?" Huru-Huru asked, as Levy, a fat man with massive asymmetrical features,
stepped out upon the beach. "Mapuhi has found a pearl. There was never a pearl like it in Hikueru,
in all the Paumotus, in all the world. Mapuhi is a fool. He has sold it to Toriki for fourteen
hundred Chili--I listened outside and heard. Toriki is likewise a fool. You can buy it from
him cheap. Remember that I told you first. Have you any tobacco?"

"Where is Toriki?"

"In the house of Captain Lynch, drinking absinthe. He has been there an hour."

And while Levy and Toriki drank absinthe and chaffered over the pearl, Huru-Huru listened and
heard the stupendous price of twenty-five thousand francs agreed upon.

It was at this time that both the OROHENA and the Hira, running in close to the shore, began
firing guns and signalling frantically. The three men stepped outside in time to see the two
schooners go hastily about and head off shore, dropping mainsails and flying jibs on the run
in the teeth of the squall that heeled them far over on the whitened water. Then the rain blotted
them out.

"They'll be back after it's over," said Toriki. "We'd better be getting out of here."

"I reckon the glass has fallen some more," said Captain Lynch.

He was a white-bearded sea-captain, too old for service, who had learned that the only way
to live on comfortable terms with his asthma was on Hikueru. He went inside to look at the
barometer.

"Great God!" they heard him exclaim, and rushed in to join him at staring at a dial, which
marked twenty-nine-twenty.

Again they came out, this time anxiously to consult sea and sky. The squall had cleared away,
but the sky remained overcast. The two schooners, under all sail and joined by a third, could
be seen making back. A veer in the wind induced them to slack off sheets, and five minutes
afterward a sudden veer from the opposite quarter caught all three schooners aback, and those
on shore could see the boom-tackles being slacked away or cast off on the jump. The sound of
the surf was loud, hollow, and menacing, and a heavy swell was setting in. A terrible sheet
of lightning burst before their eyes, illuminating the dark day, and the thunder rolled wildly
about them.

Toriki and Levy broke into a run for their boats, the latter ambling along like a panic-stricken
hippopotamus. As their two boats swept out the entrance, they passed the boat of the Aorai
coming in. In the stern sheets, encouraging the rowers, was Raoul. Unable to shake the vision
of the pearl from his mind, he was returning to accept Mapuhi's price of a house.

He landed on the beach in the midst of a driving thunder squall that was so dense that he collided
with Huru-Huru before he saw him.

"Too late," yelled Huru-Huru. "Mapuhi sold it to Toriki for fourteen hundred Chili, and Toriki
sold it to Levy for twenty-five thousand francs. And Levy will sell it in France for a hundred
thousand francs. Have you any tobacco?"

Raoul felt relieved. His troubles about the pearl were over. He need not worry any more, even
if he had not got the pearl. But he did not believe Huru-Huru. Mapuhi might well have sold
it for fourteen hundred Chili, but that Levy, who knew pearls, should have paid twenty-five
thousand francs was too wide a stretch. Raoul decided to interview Captain Lynch on the subject,
but when he arrived at that ancient mariner's house, he found him looking wide-eyed at the
barometer.

"What do you read it?" Captain Lynch asked anxiously, rubbing his spectacles and staring again
at the instrument.

"Twenty-nine-ten," said Raoul. "I have never seen it so low before."

"I should say not!" snorted the captain. "Fifty years boy and man on all the seas, and I've
never seen it go down to that. Listen!"

They stood for a moment, while the surf rumbled and shook the house. Then they went outside.
The squall had passed. They could see the Aorai lying becalmed a mile away and pitching and
tossing madly in the tremendous seas that rolled in stately procession down out of the northeast
and flung themselves furiously upon the coral shore. One of the sailors from the boat pointed
at the mouth of the passage and shook his head. Raoul looked and saw a white anarchy of foam
and surge.

"I guess I'll stay with you tonight, Captain," he said; then turned to the sailor and told
him to haul the boat out and to find shelter for himself and fellows.

"Twenty-nine flat," Captain Lynch reported, coming out from another look at the barometer,
a chair in his hand.

He sat down and stared at the spectacle of the sea. The sun came out, increasing the sultriness
of the day, while the dead calm still held. The seas continued to increase in magnitude.

"What makes that sea is what gets me," Raoul muttered petulantly.

"There is no wind, yet look at it, look at that fellow there!"

Miles in length, carrying tens of thousands of tons in weight, its impact shook the frail atoll
like an earthquake. Captain Lynch was startled.

"Gracious!" he bellowed, half rising from his chair, then sinking back.

"But there is no wind," Raoul persisted. "I could understand it if there was wind along with it."

"You'll get the wind soon enough without worryin' for it," was the grim reply.

The two men sat on in silence. The sweat stood out on their skin in myriads of tiny drops that
ran together, forming blotches of moisture, which, in turn, coalesced into rivulets that dripped
to the ground. They panted for breath, the old man's efforts being especially painful. A sea
swept up the beach, licking around the trunks of the cocoanuts and subsiding almost at their feet.

"Way past high water mark," Captain Lynch remarked; "and I've been here eleven years." He looked
at his watch. "It is three o'clock."

A man and woman, at their heels a motley following of brats and curs, trailed disconsolately
by. They came to a halt beyond the house, and, after much irresolution, sat down in the sand.
A few minutes later another family trailed in from the opposite direction, the men and women
carrying a heterogeneous assortment of possessions. And soon several hundred persons of all
ages and sexes were congregated about the captain's dwelling. He called to one new arrival,
a woman with a nursing babe in her arms, and in answer received the information that her house
had just been swept into the lagoon.

This was the highest spot of land in miles, and already, in many places on either hand, the
great seas were making a clean breach of the slender ring of the atoll and surging into the
lagoon. Twenty miles around stretched the ring of the atoll, and in no place was it more than
fifty fathoms wide. It was the height of the diving season, and from all the islands around,
even as far as Tahiti, the natives had gathered.

"There are twelve hundred men, women, and children here," said Captain Lynch. "I wonder how
many will be here tomorrow morning."

"But why don't it blow?--that's what I want to know," Raoul demanded.

"Don't worry, young man, don't worry; you'll get your troubles fast enough."

Even as Captain Lynch spoke, a great watery mass smote the atoll.

The sea water churned about them three inches deep under the chairs. A low wail of fear went
up from the many women. The children, with clasped hands, stared at the immense rollers and
cried piteously. Chickens and cats, wading perturbedly in the water, as by common consent,
with flight and scramble took refuge on the roof of the captain's house. A Paumotan, with a
litter of new-born puppies in a basket, climbed into a cocoanut tree and twenty feet above
the ground made the basket fast. The mother floundered about in the water beneath, whining
and yelping.

And still the sun shone brightly and the dead calm continued. They sat and watched the seas
and the insane pitching of the Aorai. Captain Lynch gazed at the huge mountains of water sweeping
in until he could gaze no more. He covered his face with his hands to shut out the sight; then
went into the house.

"Twenty-eight-sixty," he said quietly when he returned.

In his arm was a coil of small rope. He cut it into two-fathom lengths, giving one to Raoul
and, retaining one for himself, distributed the remainder among the women with the advice to
pick out a tree and climb.

A light air began to blow out of the northeast, and the fan of it on his cheek seemed to cheer
Raoul up. He could see the Aorai trimming her sheets and heading off shore, and he regretted
that he was not on her. She would get away at any rate, but as for the atoll--A sea breached
across, almost sweeping him off his feet, and he selected a tree. Then he remembered the barometer
and ran back to the house. He encountered Captain Lynch on the same errand and together they
went in.

"Twenty-eight-twenty," said the old mariner. "It's going to be fair hell around here--what
was that?"

The air seemed filled with the rush of something. The house quivered and vibrated, and they
heard the thrumming of a mighty note of sound. The windows rattled. Two panes crashed; a draught
of wind tore in, striking them and making them stagger. The door opposite banged shut, shattering
the latch. The white door knob crumbled in fragments to the floor. The room's walls bulged
like a gas balloon in the process of sudden inflation. Then came a new sound like the rattle
of musketry, as the spray from a sea struck the wall of the house. Captain Lynch looked at
his watch. It was four o'clock. He put on a coat of pilot cloth, unhooked the barometer, and
stowed it away in a capacious pocket. Again a sea struck the house, with a heavy thud, and
the light building tilted, twisted, quarter around on its foundation, and sank down, its floor
at an angle of ten degrees.

Raoul went out first. The wind caught him and whirled him away. He noted that it had hauled
around to the east. With a great effort he threw himself on the sand, crouching and holding
his own. Captain Lynch, driven like a wisp of straw, sprawled over him. Two of the Aorai's
sailors, leaving a cocoanut tree to which they had been clinging, came to their aid, leaning
against the wind at impossible angles and fighting and clawing every inch of the way.

The old man's joints were stiff and he could not climb, so the sailors, by means of short ends
of rope tied together, hoisted him up the trunk, a few feet at a time, till they could make
him fast, at the top of the tree, fifty feet from the ground. Raoul passed his length of rope
around the base of an adjacent tree and stood looking on. The wind was frightful. He had never
dreamed it could blow so hard. A sea breached across the atoll, wetting him to the knees ere
it subsided into the lagoon. The sun had disappeared, and a lead-colored twilight settled down.
A few drops of rain, driving horizontally, struck him. The impact was like that of leaden pellets.
A splash of salt spray struck his face. It was like the slap of a man's hand. His cheeks stung,
and involuntary tears of pain were in his smarting eyes. Several hundred natives had taken
to the trees, and he could have laughed at the bunches of human fruit clustering in the tops.
Then, being Tahitian-born, he doubled his body at the waist, clasped the trunk of his tree
with his hands, pressed the soles of his feet against the near surface of the trunk, and began
to walk up the tree. At the top he found two women, two children, and a man. One little girl
clasped a housecat in her arms.

From his eyrie he waved his hand to Captain Lynch, and that doughty patriarch waved back. Raoul
was appalled at the sky. It had approached much nearer--in fact, it seemed just over his head;
and it had turned from lead to black. Many people were still on the ground grouped about the
bases of the trees and holding on. Several such clusters were praying, and in one the Mormon
missionary was exhorting. A weird sound, rhythmical, faint as the faintest chirp of a far cricket,
enduring but for a moment, but in the moment suggesting to him vaguely the thought of heaven
and celestial music, came to his ear. He glanced about him and saw, at the base of another
tree, a large cluster of people holding on by ropes and by one another. He could see their
faces working and their lips moving in unison. No sound came to him, but he knew that they
were singing hymns.

Still the wind continued to blow harder. By no conscious process could he measure it, for it
had long since passed beyond all his experience of wind; but he knew somehow, nevertheless,
that it was blowing harder. Not far away a tree was uprooted, flinging its load of human beings
to the ground. A sea washed across the strip of sand, and they were gone. Things were happening
quickly. He saw a brown shoulder and a black head silhouetted against the churning white of
the lagoon. The next instant that, too, had vanished. Other trees were going, falling and criss-crossing
like matches. He was amazed at the power of the wind. His own tree was swaying perilously,
one woman was wailing and clutching the little girl, who in turn still hung on to the cat.

The man, holding the other child, touched Raoul's arm and pointed. He looked and saw the Mormon
church careering drunkenly a hundred feet away. It had been torn from its foundations, and
wind and sea were heaving and shoving it toward the lagoon. A frightful wall of water caught
it, tilted it, and flung it against half a dozen cocoanut trees. The bunches of human fruit
fell like ripe cocoanuts. The subsiding wave showed them on the ground, some lying motionless,
others squirming and writhing. They reminded him strangely of ants. He was not shocked. He
had risen above horror. Quite as a matter of course he noted the succeeding wave sweep the
sand clean of the human wreckage. A third wave, more colossal than any he had yet seen, hurled
the church into the lagoon, where it floated off into the obscurity to leeward, half-submerged,
reminding him for all the world of a Noah's ark.

He looked for Captain Lynch's house, and was surprised to find it gone. Things certainly were
happening quickly. He noticed that many of the people in the trees that still held had descended
to the ground. The wind had yet again increased. His own tree showed that. It no longer swayed
or bent over and back. Instead, it remained practically stationary, curved in a rigid angle
from the wind and merely vibrating. But the vibration was sickening. It was like that of a
tuning-fork or the tongue of a jew's-harp. It was the rapidity of the vibration that made it
so bad. Even though its roots held, it could not stand the strain for long. Something would
have to break.

Ah, there was one that had gone. He had not seen it go, but there it stood, the remnant, broken
off half-way up the trunk. One did not know what happened unless he saw it. The mere crashing
of trees and wails of human despair occupied no place in that mighty volume of sound. He chanced
to be looking in Captain Lynch's direction when it happened. He saw the trunk of the tree,
half-way up, splinter and part without noise. The head of the tree, with three sailors of the
Aorai and the old captain sailed off over the lagoon. It did not fall to the ground, but drove
through the air like a piece of chaff. For a hundred yards he followed its flight, when it
struck the water. He strained his eyes, and was sure that he saw Captain Lynch wave farewell.

Raoul did not wait for anything more. He touched the native and made signs to descend to the
ground. The man was willing, but his women were paralyzed from terror, and he elected to remain
with them. Raoul passed his rope around the tree and slid down. A rush of salt water went over
his head. He held his breath and clung desperately to the rope. The water subsided, and in
the shelter of the trunk he breathed once more. He fastened the rope more securely, and then
was put under by another sea. One of the women slid down and joined him, the native remaining
by the other woman, the two children, and the cat.

The supercargo had noticed how the groups clinging at the bases of the other trees continually
diminished. Now he saw the process work out alongside him. It required all his strength to
hold on, and the woman who had joined him was growing weaker. Each time he emerged from a sea
he was surprised to find himself still there, and next, surprised to find the woman still there.
At last he emerged to find himself alone. He looked up. The top of the tree had gone as well.
At half its original height, a splintered end vibrated. He was safe. The roots still held,
while the tree had been shorn of its windage. He began to climb up. He was so weak that he
went slowly, and sea after sea caught him before he was above them. Then he tied himself to
the trunk and stiffened his soul to face the night and he knew not what.

He felt very lonely in the darkness. At times it seemed to him that it was the end of the world
and that he was the last one left alive. Still the wind increased. Hour after hour it increased.
By what he calculated was eleven o'clock, the wind had become unbelievable. It was a horrible,
monstrous thing, a screaming fury, a wall that smote and passed on but that continued to smite
and pass on--a wall without end. It seemed to him that he had become light and ethereal; that
it was he that was in motion; that he was being driven with inconceivable velocity through
unending solidness. The wind was no longer air in motion. It had become substantial as water
or quicksilver. He had a feeling that he could reach into it and tear it out in chunks as one
might do with the meat in the carcass of a steer; that he could seize hold of the wind and
hang on to it as a man might hang on to the face of a cliff.

The wind strangled him. He could not face it and breathe, for it rushed in through his mouth
and nostrils, distending his lungs like bladders. At such moments it seemed to him that his
body was being packed and swollen with solid earth. Only by pressing his lips to the trunk
of the tree could he breathe. Also, the ceaseless impact of the wind exhausted him. Body and
brain became wearied. He no longer observed, no longer thought, and was but semiconscious.
One idea constituted his consciousness: SO THIS WAS A HURRICANE. That one idea persisted irregularly.
It was like a feeble flame that flickered occasionally. From a state of stupor he would return
to it--SO THIS WAS A HURRICANE. Then he would go off into another stupor.

The height of the hurricane endured from eleven at night till three in the morning, and it
was at eleven that the tree in which clung Mapuhi and his women snapped off. Mapuhi rose to
the surface of the lagoon, still clutching his daughter Ngakura. Only a South Sea islander
could have lived in such a driving smother. The pandanus tree, to which he attached himself,
turned over and over in the froth and churn; and it was only by holding on at times and waiting,
and at other times shifting his grips rapidly, that he was able to get his head and Ngakura's
to the surface at intervals sufficiently near together to keep the breath in them. But the
air was mostly water, what with flying spray and sheeted rain that poured along at right angles
to the perpendicular.

It was ten miles across the lagoon to the farther ring of sand. Here, tossing tree trunks,
timbers, wrecks of cutters, and wreckage of houses, killed nine out of ten of the miserable
beings who survived the passage of the lagoon. Half-drowned, exhausted, they were hurled into
this mad mortar of the elements and battered into formless flesh. But Mapuhi was fortunate.
His chance was the one in ten; it fell to him by the freakage of fate. He emerged upon the
sand, bleeding from a score of wounds.

Ngakura's left arm was broken; the fingers of her right hand were crushed; and cheek and forehead
were laid open to the bone. He clutched a tree that yet stood, and clung on, holding the girl
and sobbing for air, while the waters of the lagoon washed by knee-high and at times waist-high.

At three in the morning the backbone of the hurricane broke. By five no more than a stiff breeze
was blowing. And by six it was dead calm and the sun was shining. The sea had gone down. On
the yet restless edge of the lagoon, Mapuhi saw the broken bodies of those that had failed
in the landing. Undoubtedly Tefara and Nauri were among them. He went along the beach examining
them, and came upon his wife, lying half in and half out of the water. He sat down and wept,
making harsh animal noises after the manner of primitive grief. Then she stirred uneasily,
and groaned. He looked more closely. Not only was she alive, but she was uninjured. She was
merely sleeping. Hers also had been the one chance in ten.

Of the twelve hundred alive the night before but three hundred remained. The Mormon missionary
and a gendarme made the census. The lagoon was cluttered with corpses. Not a house nor a hut
was standing. In the whole atoll not two stones remained one upon another. One in fifty of
the cocoanut palms still stood, and they were wrecks, while on not one of them remained a single
nut.

There was no fresh water. The shallow wells that caught the surface seepage of the rain were
filled with salt. Out of the lagoon a few soaked bags of flour were recovered. The survivors
cut the hearts out of the fallen cocoanut trees and ate them. Here and there they crawled into
tiny hutches, made by hollowing out the sand and covering over with fragments of metal roofing.
The missionary made a crude still, but he could not distill water for three hundred persons.
By the end of the second day, Raoul, taking a bath in the lagoon, discovered that his thirst
was somewhat relieved. He cried out the news, and thereupon three hundred men, women, and children
could have been seen, standing up to their necks in the lagoon and trying to drink water in
through their skins. Their dead floated about them, or were stepped upon where they still lay
upon the bottom. On the third day the people buried their dead and sat down to wait for the
rescue steamers.

In the meantime, Nauri, torn from her family by the hurricane, had been swept away on an adventure
of her own. Clinging to a rough plank that wounded and bruised her and that filled her body
with splinters, she was thrown clear over the atoll and carried away to sea. Here, under the
amazing buffets of mountains of water, she lost her plank. She was an old woman nearly sixty;
but she was Paumotan-born, and she had never been out of sight of the sea in her life. Swimming
in the darkness, strangling, suffocating, fighting for air, she was struck a heavy blow on
the shoulder by a cocoanut. On the instant her plan was formed, and she seized the nut. In
the next hour she captured seven more. Tied together, they formed a life-buoy that preserved
her life while at the same time it threatened to pound her to a jelly. She was a fat woman,
and she bruised easily; but she had had experience of hurricanes, and while she prayed to her
shark god for protection from sharks, she waited for the wind to break. But at three o'clock
she was in such a stupor that she did not know. Nor did she know at six o'clock when the dead
calm settled down. She was shocked into consciousness when she was thrown upon the sand. She
dug in with raw and bleeding hands and feet and clawed against the backwash until she was beyond
the reach of the waves.

She knew where she was. This land could be no other than the tiny islet of Takokota. It had
no lagoon. No one lived upon it.

Hikueru was fifteen miles away. She could not see Hikueru, but she knew that it lay to the
south. The days went by, and she lived on the cocoanuts that had kept her afloat. They supplied
her with drinking water and with food. But she did not drink all she wanted, nor eat all she
wanted. Rescue was problematical. She saw the smoke of the rescue steamers on the horizon,
but what steamer could be expected to come to lonely, uninhabited Takokota?

From the first she was tormented by corpses. The sea persisted in flinging them upon her bit
of sand, and she persisted, until her strength failed, in thrusting them back into the sea
where the sharks tore at them and devoured them. When her strength failed, the bodies festooned
her beach with ghastly horror, and she withdrew from them as far as she could, which was not far.

By the tenth day her last cocoanut was gone, and she was shrivelling from thirst. She dragged
herself along the sand, looking for cocoanuts. It was strange that so many bodies floated up,
and no nuts. Surely, there were more cocoanuts afloat than dead men! She gave up at last, and
lay exhausted. The end had come. Nothing remained but to wait for death.

Coming out of a stupor, she became slowly aware that she was gazing at a patch of sandy-red
hair on the head of a corpse. The sea flung the body toward her, then drew it back. It turned
over, and she saw that it had no face. Yet there was something familiar about that patch of
sandy-red hair. An hour passed. She did not exert herself to make the identification. She was
waiting to die, and it mattered little to her what man that thing of horror once might have been.

But at the end of the hour she sat up slowly and stared at the corpse. An unusually large wave
had thrown it beyond the reach of the lesser waves. Yes, she was right; that patch of red hair
could belong to but one man in the Paumotus. It was Levy, the German Jew, the man who had bought
the pearl and carried it away on the Hira. Well, one thing was evident: The Hira had been lost.
The pearl buyer's god of fishermen and thieves had gone back on him.

She crawled down to the dead man. His shirt had been torn away, and she could see the leather
money belt about his waist. She held her breath and tugged at the buckles. The Patron Saint of
England. The circumstances which led to his association with England are unknown. His Shield of
arms, a red cross on a silver field, first appears in English Heraldry in the fourteenth century:
No. 1.

George, The. A mounted figure of the Saint in the act of piercing the dragon with his lance,
and worn as a pendant to the collar of the Order of the Garter; added to the insignia of the
Order, with the Collar, by HENRY VII. The Lesser George has the same group on an enamelled
field, and surrounded by the Garter of the Order, the whole forming a “jewel,” generally oval
in shape: it was introduced by HENRY VIII., and is now worn pendent
from the dark-blue ribbon of the Order, the ribbon passing over the
left shoulder and the jewel hanging on the right side of the wearer.

Originally, this “Lesser George” was worn from either a gold chain or a black ribbon: by Queen
ELIZABETH the colour of the ribbon was changed to sky-blue, and it assumed its present darker
hue in the reign of CHARLES II.

Gerattyng. Differencing by the introduction of small charges. It is an early term, now obsolete.

Gimmel-ring.
Two annulets, interlaced.

Girt, Girdled. Encircled, or bound round.

Gonfannon.

A long flag, pointed or swallow-tailed at the fly, and displayed from a transverse bar attached
to a staff.

Gorged. Encircled round the throat.

Gouttée, Guttée. Sprinkled over with drops either of gold--gouttée d’or; of silver--d’eau; of
blue--de larmes (tears); of red--de sang (blood); or of black--de
poix (pitch).

Grand Quarters. The four primary divisions of a Shield, when it is divided quarterly: Nos. 30,
36, 37. The term “Grand Quarter” may be used to signify a primary quarter or division of a
quartered Shield or Coat, and to distinguish such a quarter when
it is quartered.

Grieces. Steps.

Guardant. Looking out from the field: Nos. 172, 174, 176, 187.

Guige. A Shield-belt, worn over the right shoulder, and frequently represented in heraldic compositions
as if sustaining a Shield of arms: Nos. 48, 49.

Gules. Red: No. 53.

Gurges, or Gorges. A charge formed of a spiral line of blue on a white field, and supposed
to represent a whirlpool: borne (H. 3) by R. DE GORGES: No. 256.

Gyron. A Subordinary. Gyronny. A field divided into Gyrons: No. 147. (See page 70.)

Habited. Clothed.

Hames, Heames. Parts of horses’ harness.

Hammer, or Martel. Represented in blazon much in the same shape as the implement in common use
(H. 3).

Harp. A device and badge of Ireland. The Irish Harp of gold with silver strings on a blue field forms
the third quarter of the Royal Arms.

Hart. A stag, with attires; the female is a Hind: page 81.

Hastilude. A tournament.

Hatchment. An achievement of arms in a lozenge-shaped frame, placed upon the front (generally
over the principal entrance) of the residence of a person lately deceased. In the case of the
decease of an unmarried person, or of a widower or widow, the whole of the field of the hatchment
is painted black; but in the case of a married person, that part only of the field is black
which adjoins the side of the achievement occupied by the armorial insignia of the individual
deceased. Thus, if a husband be deceased, the dexter half of the field of the hatchment is
black, and the sinister white; and so, in like manner, if the wife be deceased, the sinister
is black and the dexter white.

Hauriant.

A fish in pale, its head in chief.

Hawk’s bells, jesses, and lure. A falconer’s decoy, formed of feathers with their tips in base,
and joined by a cord and ring, No. 257; also bells with straps to
be attached to hawks, No. 258.

Heightened. Raised; placed above or higher.

Heights. Applied to plumes of feathers which are arranged in rows
or sets, one rising above another.

See Panache.

Helm, Helmet. Now placed as an accessory above a Shield of arms, and bearing its Crest after the
fashion in which, in the Middle Ages, both Helm and Crest were actually worn in tournaments.
A modern usage distinguishes Helms as follows:--The Sovereign--Helm of gold, with six bars,
set affrontée, No. 259; Noblemen--Helm of silver, garnished with
gold, set in profile, and showing five bars, No. 260; Baronets and
Knights--of steel with silver ornaments, without bars, the vizor raised,
set affrontée, No. 261; Esquires and Gentlemen--of steel, the vizor
closed, and set in profile, Nos.

262, 263. The Helms that appear on early Seals and in other heraldic compositions till about
A.D. 1600, are all set in profile, and the shield generally hangs from them couchée, as in
No. 49. In these early compositions, the shield is small in proportion to the helm and its accessories.

Hemp-brake,
Hackle. An instrument having saw-teeth, used for bruising hemp.

Heneage Knot. No. 264.

Herald. An officer of arms.

The Heralds of England were incorporated by RICHARD III.; and from
Queen MARY, in 1555, they received a grant of Derby House, on the
site of which, between St. Paul’s Cathedral and the Thames, stands
their present official residence, HERALDS’ COLLEGE, or the COLLEGE
OF ARMS.

The college now consists of three KINGS-OF-ARMS--Garter, Clarenceux,
and Norroy; six HERALDS, who have precedence by seniority of appointment--Chester,
Lancaster, Richmond, Windsor, York, and Somerset; and four PURSUIVANTS--Rouge
Dragon, Portcullis, Rouge Croix, and Bluemantle.

The official habit is a Tabard, emblazoned with the Royal Arms, and the Kings and Heralds wear
a Collar of SS.

The Kings have a Crown, formed of a golden circlet, from which rise
sixteen oak-leaves, nine of which appear in representations; and the
circlet itself is charged with the words, Miserere mei Deus secundum
magnam misericordiam tuam (“Have mercy on me, O God, according to
thy great loving-kindness”).

The supreme head of the English Heralds, under the SOVEREIGN, is the
EARL MARSHAL, an office hereditary in the family of the DUKE OF NORFOLK.

The Arms of the College are--Arg., a cross gu., between four doves
their dexter wings expanded and inverted az.: No. 265; Crest--From
a crest-coronet or, a dove rising az.; Supporters--Two lions ramp.
guard. arg., ducally gorged or. Each of the Kings has his own official
arms, which he impales with his paternal coat on the dexter side of
the shield.

The Arms of Garter are--Arg., a cross gu.; on a chief az., a ducal
coronet encircled with a Garter of the Order, between a lion of England
and a fleur de lys, all or. Clarenceux and Norroy have the same shield,
but the former has a lion of England only, crowned, on a chief gules;
and the latter, on a chief per pale az. and gu., has a similar lion
between a fleur de lys and a key, all of gold.

There is also another King styled “Bath,” who is specially attached
to the Order of the Bath; he is not a member of the College.

“Lyon King-of-Arms” is the chief Herald of Scotland; and the establishment
over which he presides is styled the “Lyon Office.” The Arms of the
Office are--Arg., a lion sejant erect and affronté gu., holding in
his dexter paw a thistle slipped vert, and in the sinister an escutcheon
of the second; on a chief az., a saltire of the first: No. 266.

Ireland is the heraldic province of “Ulster King-of-Arms.” His official armorial ensigns differ from
those of Garter only in the charges of the chief, which are a lion of England between a golden
harp and a portcullis.

Herison. A hedgehog.

Hill, Hillock. A mound of earth.

Hirondelle. A swallow.

Hoist. The depth of a flag from chief to base. See Fly.

Honour Point. No. 27, L.

Humettée. Cut short at the extremities.

Hurst. A clump of trees.

Hurt. A blue roundle.

Illegitimacy. See Chapter XII.

Imbrued, or Embrued. Stained with blood.

Impaled. Conjoined per pale.

Impalement. The uniting of two (or more) distinct coats per pale, to form a single achievement.

Imperially
Crowned. Ensigned with the Crown of England.

Incensed, Inflamed. On fire; having fire issuing forth.

Increscent. No. 166, B. See Decrescent.

Indented. No. 38, A.

Inescutcheon. An heraldic Shield borne as a charge. This term is sometimes used to denote an
Escutcheon of Pretence.

In bend. Disposed in the position of a bend; In Chevron, In Chief, In Cross, In Fesse, &c. Disposed
after the manner of a chevron, or in the chief of the shield, or in the form of a cross, &c.

In Foliage. Bearing leaves.

In Lure. Wings conjoined in the form of a hawk’s lure.

In her piety. A term applied to a pelican feeding her young.

In Pretence. A term applied to a single inescutcheon placed upon and in the centre of a larger
escutcheon.

In Pride. Having the tail displayed, as a peacock’s.

In Quadrangle. When four charges are so disposed that one is in each quarter of the shield.

In
Splendour. The sun irradiated.

Irradiated. Surrounded by rays of light.

Issuant. Proceeding from, or out of.

Jambe, Gambe. The leg of a lion, or other beast of prey: No. 185.

Jelloped. Having wattles and a comb, as a cock.

Jesses. Straps for hawk’s bells.

Jessant. Shooting forth. Jessant de lys.--A combination of a leopard’s face and a fleur-de-lys:
No. 267.

Joust. A tournament.

Jupon. A short, sleeveless surcoat, worn over armour from about 1340 to about 1405. It is often
charged with armorial insignia, and thus is a true “coat of arms.”

Key. When represented in early blazon, Keys have always elegant forms. No. 268 is from Peterborough
Cathedral, and No. 269 from Exeter.

King-of-Arms. See Herald.

Knighthood, Orders of: Knights. See Chapter XVI.

Knot. An intertwined cord, borne as a badge. The varieties of this device are--The Bourchier,
No. 219; the Bowen, No. 220; the Harington (the same as a Frette), No. 148; the Heneage, No. 264;
the Lacy, No. 274; the Stafford, No. 304; and the Wake and Ormond, No. 313. Cords were sometimes
intertwined about other figures and devices, and so formed what may be regarded as Compound
Badges, which significantly declared the union of two houses: thus, the knot of EDWARD Lord
HASTINGS unites the Hungerford sickle with the Peverel garbe: No. 270; and the Dacre knot is
entwined about the Dacre escallop and the famous “ragged staff” of
Beauchamp and Neville: No. 235.

Label, or File. A narrow ribbon placed across the field of a shield near the chief, and having
three, five, or sometimes other numbers of points depending from
it, its object being to mark Cadency.

In the early Labels the number of the points was arbitrary, the usual numbers being five and three;
and, subsequently, three points were almost universally used; the object always was to render
the Label conspicuous. In blazon a Label is supposed to have three points; but, if more, the
number is to be specified; thus, No. 271 is simply “a Label,” but No. 272 is “a Label of five
points.” Labels appear early in the thirteenth century, and in the next century they are in
constant use.

Various charges may be placed on the “points” of Labels to extend
their capacity for “differencing.” Since the time of EDWARD the BLACK
PRINCE the Label of the PRINCE OF WALES has been plain silver.

The Label is almost exclusively (now without any exception) used in Royal Cadency; but, in
modern Heraldry, in the case of all other persons it is the peculiar
mark of the eldest son.

The Label is also found as a charge. It has become a usage in the degenerate days of Heraldry
to represent the Label as in No. 273, instead of the earlier and
far preferable forms of Nos.

271, 272.

Lacy Knot. No. 274.

Lambrequin. A mantling.

Langued. A term which refers to the tincture of an animal’s tongue.

Leaves. Their peculiarities are to be blazoned, as laurel leaves, oak leaves, &c.

Leopard, Leopardé. See page 84.

Letters of the Alphabet sometimes are Charges. Thus, the Arms of the Deanery of Canterbury are--Az.,
on a cross arg., the letter “x” surmounted by the letter “i” sable: the “x” is on the cross
at the intersection of its limbs, and the “i” is above it.

Line, or Border Line. No. 38.

Lined. Having a cord attached: also, having a lining.

Lion. See page 83.

Lioncel. A lion drawn to a small scale, and generally rampant, Nos. 114, 115, 197.

Livery Colours.

Of the PLANTAGENETS, as one family, white and scarlet; of the house of YORK, blue and murrey;
of the house of LANCASTER, white and blue; of the house of TUDOR,
white and green. The present Royal Livery is scarlet and gold. In
the Middle Ages, all great families had their own livery colours,
which had no necessary relation to the tinctures of the shield.

Lodged.
A term denoting animals of the chase when at rest or in repose, Nos.
25, 26.

Lozenge. A square figure set diagonally, No. 47 (also see
page 69). The armorial insignia of unmarried ladies and widows, with
the sole exception of a Sovereign, are blazoned on a Lozenge instead
of an Escutcheon.

Lozengy. A field divided lozengewise: No. 145.

Luce,
or Lucy. The fish now called pike. See page 77 and No. 164.

Lure.
See In Lure.

Lymphad. An ancient galley, No. 275. It was the feudal
ensign of the Scottish lordship of LORN, and as such quartered by
the Duke of ARGYLL.

Maintenance, Cap of. See Chapeau.

Manche, Maunche.
A lady’s sleeve with a long pendent lappet, worn in the time of HENRY I.,
and borne as an armorial charge by the families of HASTINGS, CONYERS,
and some others. HASTINGS (H. 3)--Or, a manche gu.: No. 276.

Mantle.
A flowing robe worn over the armour, or over their ordinary costume,
by personages of distinction of both sexes: the mantles of ladies
were commonly decorated with armorial blazonry.

Mantling, or Lambrequin.
A small mantle of some rich materials, attached to the knightly basinet
or helm, and worn hanging down. It is usually represented with jagged
edges, to represent the cuts to which it would be exposed in actual
battle: No. 199. (See Panache.) Mantlings blazoned with achievements
of arms are sometimes adjusted in folds to form a background to the
composition, and they are also occasionally differenced with various
charges.

Marquess, Marquis. The second order of the British Peerage,
in rank next to that of Duke. This rank and title were introduced
into England in 1387, by RICHARD II., who then created his favourite,
ROBERT DE VERE, Marquess of DUBLIN. The next creation was by HENRY VI.
A Marquess is “Most Honourable”; he is styled “My Lord Marquess”:
all his younger sons are “Lords,” and his daughters “Ladies”; his
eldest son bears his father’s “second title.” The Coronet, apparently
contemporary in its present form with that of Dukes, has its golden
circlet heightened with four strawberry leaves and as many pearls,
arranged alternately: in representations two of the pearls, and one
leaf and two half-leaves are shown, No. 277. The wife of a Marquess
is a “Marchioness”; her style corresponds with that of her husband,
and her coronet is the same.

Marshalling. The disposition of more
than one distinct coat of arms upon a shield, so forming a single
composition; or the aggroupment of two or more distinct shields, so
as to form a single composition; also the association of such accessories
as the helm, mantling, crest, &c., and of knightly and other insignia
with a shield of arms, thus again forming a single heraldic composition.
See Chapter XI.

Martel. A hammer.

Martlet. The heraldic Martin,
usually represented without feet: Nos. 160, 161, and 70 and 86.

Mascle.
Lozenge voided: No. 143. Masculée. A field divided mascle-wise.

Masoned.
Representing brickwork.

Membered. To denote the legs of a bird.

Merchant’s
mark. A device, adopted as early as 1400 by merchants, as a substitute
for heraldic ensigns which were not conceded to them. Such marks are
the predecessors of the Trade-brands and Marks of after times.

Mermaid,
Merman, or Triton. The well-known fabulous creatures of the sea, borne
occasionally as charges, but more frequently as supporters, badges,
or crests. A mermaid was the device of Sir WILLIAM DE BRIVERE, who
died in 1226, and it is the badge of the BERKELEYS.

Metal. The Tinctures
Or and Argent: Nos. 50, 51.

Mill-rind. See Fer-de-Moline.

Mitre.
The ensign of archiepiscopal and episcopal rank, placed above the
arms of prelates of the Church of England, sometimes borne as a charge,
and adopted by the BERKELEYS as their crest. The contour of the mitre
has varied considerably at different periods, the early examples being
low and concave in their sides, the later lofty and convex. See No.
159.

Moline. A cross terminating like a Fer-de-moline, No. 97. In
modern cadency it is the difference of the eighth son.

Moon. No.
166, page 80.

Motto. A word, or very short sentence, placed generally
below a shield but sometimes above a crest, an idea perhaps derived
from the “war-cries” of early times. A motto may be emblematical,
or it may have some allusion to the person bearing it, or to his name
and armorial insignia; or it may be the epigrammatic expression of
some sentiment in special favour with the bearer of it. As a matter
of course, allusive mottoes, like allusive arms, afford curious examples
of mediæval puns. I give a few characteristic examples:--“Vero nil
verius” (nothing truer than truth, or, no greater verity than in Vere)--VERE;
“Fare, fac” (Speak--act; that is, a word and blow)--FAIRFAX; “Cave”
(beware)--CAVE; “Cavendo tutus” (safe, by caution, or by Cavendish)--CAVENDISH;
“Set on,” says SETON; “Fight on,” quoth FITTON; “Festina lente” (On
slow--push forward, but be cautious, that is), adds ONSLOW. Again:
JEFFERAY says, “Je feray ce que je diray” (I shall be true to my word);
SCUDAMORE--Scutum amoris divini (the shield of Divine love); says
JAMES--“J’aime jamais” (I love ever); says ESTWICK--“Est hic” (he
is here); and POLE--“Pollet virtus” (valour prevails); and TEV--“Tais
en temps” (be silent in time). The crest of CHARTERIS, an arm with
the hand grasping a sword, has over it--“This our charter is.” In
his arms the Marquess CHOLMONDELEY bears two helmets, and his motto
is--“Cassis tutissima virtus” (valour is the safest helm); the crest
of the MARTINS of Dorsetshire was an ape, with the significant motto--“He
who looks at Martin’s ape, Martin’s ape shall look at him!” The motto
of PERCEVAL is--“Perse valens” (strong in himself); but, “Do no yll,”
quoth DOYLE. Some “lippes,” as Camden remarks, have a taste for “this
kind of lettuce.”

Mound. A globe, encircled and arched over with
rich bands, and surmounted by a cross-patée, the whole an ensign of
the royal estate. A mound or orb forms part of the regalia, and the
same form appears upon the intersecting arches of the crown of the
SOVEREIGN; and it also surmounts the single arch of the coronet of
the PRINCE OF WALES: Nos. 234, 289.

Mount. A green hill.

Mullet.
A star, generally of five, but sometimes of six or more points (if
more than five the number to be specified), always formed by right
lines, as No. 278. A mullet is sometimes “pierced,” as in No. 279,
when the tincture of the field is generally apparent through the circular
aperture. In modern cadency an unpierced mullet is the difference
of the third son. See Estoile.

Mural Crown. Represents masonry, and
is embattled: No. 280.

Naiant. Swimming in fesse. See Hauriant.

Naissant.
Equivalent to Issuant, but applied only to living creatures.

Naval
Crown. Has its circlet heightened with figures of the stern and the
hoisted sail of a ship alternating: No. 281.

Nebulée, or Nebuly.
No. 38, H.

Nimbus. A glory about the head of a figure of a sainted
personage: sometimes used to denote sanctity in a symbolical device.

Norroy.
See Herald.

Nova Scotia, Badge of. See Baronet.

Nowed. Coiled in
a knot, as a snake.

Ogress. A Pellet, or black roundle.

Opinicus.
A fabulous heraldic monster, a dragon before, and a lion behind with
a camel’s tail.

Oppressed. An alternative for Debruised.

Or. The
metal gold: No. 50.

Ordinary. An early principal charge of a simple
character. See Chapter VI., and Nos. 71-128: see also page 14.

Ordinary
of arms. A list of armorial bearings, classified or arranged alphabetically,
with the names of the bearers. See Armory.

Oreiller. A cushion or
pillow, generally with tassels.

Orle. A Subordinary formed of a border
of a Shield, which is charged upon another and a larger shield, as
in No. 134. In Orle. Arranged after the manner of an Orle, forming
a border to a Shield, as in No. 86.
No, no. I tell you that in my youth I was an able man, yet did it require me three months for
one small canoe. It is a story to frighten children with; but no man can believe it."

"I am a man," the missionary said.

"True, you are a man. But it is not given to my dark understanding to know what you believe."

"I tell you, I do believe that everything was made in six days."

"So you say, so you say," the old cannibal murmured soothingly.

It was not until after John Starhurst and Narau had gone off to bed that Erirola crept into
the chief's house, and, after diplomatic speech, handed the whale tooth to Mongondro.

The old chief held the tooth in his hands for a long time. It was a beautiful tooth, and he
yearned for it. Also, he divined the request that must accompany it. "No, no; whale teeth were
beautiful," and his mouth watered for it, but he passed it back to Erirola with many apologies.

                           *****

In the early dawn John Starhurst was afoot, striding along the bush trail in his big leather
boots, at his heels the faithful Narau, himself at the heels of a naked guide lent him by Mongondro
to show the way to the next village, which was reached by midday. Here a new guide showed the
way. A mile in the rear plodded Erirola, the whale tooth in the basket slung on his shoulder.
For two days more he brought up the missionary's rear, offering the tooth to the village chiefs.
But village after village refused the tooth. It followed so quickly the missionary's advent
that they divined the request that would be made, and would have none of it.

They were getting deep into the mountains, and Erirola took a secret trail, cut in ahead of
the missionary, and reached the stronghold of the Buli of Gatoka. Now the Buli was unaware
of John Starhurst's imminent arrival. Also, the tooth was beautiful--an extraordinary specimen,
while the coloring of it was of the rarest order. The tooth was presented publicly. The Buli
of Gatoka, seated on his best mat, surrounded by his chief men, three busy fly-brushers at
his back, deigned to receive from the hand of his herald the whale tooth presented by Ra Vatu
and carried into the mountains by his cousin, Erirola. A clapping of hands went up at the acceptance
of the present, the assembled headman, heralds, and fly-brushers crying aloud in chorus:

"A! woi! woi! woi! A! woi! woi! woi! A tabua levu! woi! woi! A mudua, mudua, mudua!'

"Soon will come a man, a white man," Erirola began, after the proper pause. "He is a missionary
man, and he will come today. Ra Vatu is pleased to desire his boots. He wishes to present them
to his good friend, Mongondro, and it is in his mind to send them with the feet along in them,
for Mongondro is an old man and his teeth are not good. Be sure, O Buli, that the feet go along
in the boots. As for the rest of him, it may stop here."

The delight in the whale tooth faded out of the Buli's eyes, and he glanced about him dubiously.
Yet had he already accepted the tooth.

"A little thing like a missionary does not matter," Erirola prompted.

"No, a little thing like a missionary does not matter," the Buli answered, himself again. "Mongondro
shall have the boots. Go, you young men, some three or four of you, and meet the missionary
on the trail. Be sure you bring back the boots as well."

"It is too late," said Erirola. "Listen! He comes now."

Breaking through the thicket of brush, John Starhurst, with Narau close on his heels, strode
upon the scene. The famous boots, having filled in wading the stream, squirted fine jets of
water at every step. Starhurst looked about him with flashing eyes. Upborne by an unwavering
trust, untouched by doubt or fear, he exulted in all he saw. He knew that since the beginning
of time he was the first white man ever to tread the mountain stronghold of Gatoka.

The grass houses clung to the steep mountain side or overhung the rushing Rewa. On either side
towered a mighty precipice. At the best, three hours of sunlight penetrated that narrow gorge.
No cocoanuts nor bananas were to be seen, though dense, tropic vegetation overran everything,
dripping in airy festoons from the sheer lips of the precipices and running riot in all the
crannied ledges. At the far end of the gorge the Rewa leaped eight hundred feet in a single
span, while the atmosphere of the rock fortress pulsed to the rhythmic thunder of the fall.

From the Buli's house, John Starhurst saw emerging the Buli and his followers.

"I bring you good tidings," was the missionary's greeting.

"Who has sent you?" the Buli rejoined quietly.

"God."

"It is a new name in Viti Levu," the Buli grinned. "Of what islands, villages, or passes may
he be chief?"

"He is the chief over all islands, all villages, all passes," John Starhurst answered solemnly.
"He is the Lord over heaven and earth, and I am come to bring His word to you."

"Has he sent whale teeth?" was the insolent query.

"No, but more precious than whale teeth is the--"

"It is the custom, between chiefs, to send whale teeth," the Buli interrupted.

"Your chief is either a niggard, or you are a fool, to come empty-handed into the mountains.
Behold, a more generous than you is before you."

So saying, he showed the whale tooth he had received from Erirola.

Narau groaned.

"It is the whale tooth of Ra Vatu," he whispered to Starhurst. "I know it well. Now are we undone."

"A gracious thing," the missionary answered, passing his hand through his long beard and adjusting
his glasses. "Ra Vatu has arranged that we should be well received."

But Narau groaned again, and backed away from the heels he had dogged so faithfully.

"Ra Vatu is soon to become Lotu," Starhurst explained, "and I have come bringing the Lotu to you."

"I want none of your Lotu," said the Buli, proudly. "And it is in my mind that you will be
clubbed this day."

The Buli nodded to one of his big mountaineers, who stepped forward, swinging a club. Narau
bolted into the nearest house, seeking to hide among the woman and mats; but John Starhurst
sprang in under the club and threw his arms around his executioner's neck. From this point
of vantage he proceeded to argue. He was arguing for his life, and he knew it; but he was neither
excited nor afraid.

"It would be an evil thing for you to kill me," he told the man. "I have done you no wrong,
nor have I done the Buli wrong."

So well did he cling to the neck of the one man that they dared not strike with their clubs.
And he continued to cling and to dispute for his life with those who clamored for his death.

"I am John Starhurst," he went on calmly. "I have labored in Fiji for three years, and I have
done it for no profit. I am here among you for good. Why should any man kill me? To kill me
will not profit any man."

The Buli stole a look at the whale tooth. He was well paid for the deed.

The missionary was surrounded by a mass of naked savages, all struggling to get at him. The
death song, which is the song of the oven, was raised, and his expostulations could no longer
be heard. But so cunningly did he twine and wreathe his body about his captor's that the death
blow could not be struck. Erirola smiled, and the Buli grew angry.

"Away with you!" he cried. "A nice story to go back to the coast--a dozen of you and one missionary,
without weapons, weak as a woman, overcoming all of you."

"Wait, O Buli," John Starhurst called out from the thick of the scuffle, "and I will overcome
even you. For my weapons are Truth and Right, and no man can withstand them."

"Come to me, then," the Buli answered, "for my weapon is only a poor miserable club, and, as
you say, it cannot withstand you."

The group separated from him, and John Starhurst stood alone, facing the Buli, who was leaning
on an enormous, knotted warclub.

"Come to me, missionary man, and overcome me," the Buli challenged.

"Even so will I come to you and overcome you," John Starhurst made answer, first wiping his
spectacles and settling them properly, then beginning his advance.

The Buli raised the club and waited.

"In the first place, my death will profit you nothing," began the argument.

"I leave the answer to my club," was the Buli's reply.

And to every point he made the same reply, at the same time watching the missionary closely
in order to forestall that cunning run-in under the lifted club. Then, and for the first time,
John Starhurst knew that his death was at hand. He made no attempt to run in. Bareheaded, he
stood in the sun and prayed aloud--the mysterious figure of the inevitable white man, who,
with Bible, bullet, or rum bottle, has confronted the amazed savage in his every stronghold.
Even so stood John Starhurst in the rock fortress of the Buli of Gatoka.

"Forgive them, for they know not what they do," he prayed. "O Lord! Have mercy upon Fiji. Have
compassion for Fiji. O Jehovah, hear us for His sake, Thy Son, whom Thou didst give that through
Him all men might also become Thy children. From Thee we came, and our mind is that to Thee
we may return. The land is dark, O Lord, the land is dark. But Thou art mighty to save. Reach
out Thy hand, O Lord, and save Fiji, poor cannibal Fiji."

The Buli grew impatient.

"Now will I answer thee," he muttered, at the same time swinging his club with both hands.

Narau, hiding among the women and the mats, heard the impact of the blow and shuddered. Then
the death song arose, and he knew his beloved missionary's body was being dragged to the oven
as he heard the words:

"Drag me gently. Drag me gently."

"For I am the champion of my land."

"Give thanks! Give thanks! Give thanks!"

Next, a single voice arose out of the din, asking:

"Where is the brave man?"

A hundred voices bellowed the answer:

"Gone to be dragged into the oven and cooked."

"Where is the coward?" the single voice demanded.

"Gone to report!" the hundred voices bellowed back. "Gone to report! Gone to report!"

Narau groaned in anguish of spirit. The words of the old song were true. He was the coward,
and nothing remained to him but to go and report.

MAUKI

He weighed one hundred and ten pounds. His hair was kinky and negroid, and he was black. He
was peculiarly black. He was neither blue-black nor purple-black, but plum-black. His name
was Mauki, and he was the son of a chief. He had three tambos. Tambo is Melanesian for taboo,
and is first cousin to that Polynesian word. Mauki's three tambos were as follows: First, he
must never shake hands with a woman, nor have a woman's hand touch him or any of his personal
belongings; secondly, he must never eat clams nor any food from a fire in which clams had been
cooked; thirdly, he must never touch a crocodile, nor travel in a canoe that carried any part
of a crocodile even if as large as a tooth.

Of a different black were his teeth, which were deep black, or, perhaps better, LAMP-black.
They had been made so in a single night, by his mother, who had compressed about them a powdered
mineral which was dug from the landslide back of Port Adams. Port Adams is a salt-water village
on Malaita, and Malaita is the most savage island in the Solomons--so savage that no traders
or planters have yet gained a foothold on it; while, from the time of the earliest bêche-de-mer
fishers and sandalwood traders down to the latest labor recruiters equipped with automatic
rifles and gasolene engines, scores of white adventurers have been passed out by tomahawks
and soft-nosed Snider bullets. So Malaita remains today, in the twentieth century, the stamping
ground of the labor recruiters, who farm its coasts for laborers who engage and contract themselves
to toil on the plantations of the neighboring and more civilized islands for a wage of thirty
dollars a year. The natives of those neighboring and more civilized islands have themselves
become too civilized to work on plantations.

Mauki's ears were pierced, not in one place, nor two places, but in a couple of dozen places.
In one of the smaller holes he carried a clay pipe. The larger holes were too large for such
use. The bowl of the pipe would have fallen through. In fact, in the largest hole in each ear
he habitually wore round wooden plugs that were an even four inches in diameter. Roughly speaking,
the circumference of said holes was twelve and one-half inches. Mauki was catholic in his tastes.
In the various smaller holes he carried such things as empty rifle cartridges, horseshoe nails,
copper screws, pieces of string, braids of sennit, strips of green leaf, and, in the cool of
the day, scarlet hibiscus flowers. From which it will be seen that pockets were not necessary
to his well-being. Besides, pockets were impossible, for his only wearing apparel consisted
of a piece of calico several inches wide. A pocket knife he wore in his hair, the blade snapped
down on a kinky lock. His most prized possession was the handle of a china cup, which he suspended
from a ring of turtle-shell, which, in turn, was passed through the partition-cartilage of
his nose.

But in spite of embellishments, Mauki had a nice face. It was really a pretty face, viewed
by any standard, and for a Melanesian it was a remarkably good-looking face. Its one fault
was its lack of strength. It was softly effeminate, almost girlish. The features were small,
regular, and delicate. The chin was weak, and the mouth was weak. There was no strength nor
character in the jaws, forehead, and nose. In the eyes only could be caught any hint of the
unknown quantities that were so large a part of his make-up and that other persons could not
understand. These unknown quantities were pluck, pertinacity, fearlessness, imagination, and
cunning; and when they found expression in some consistent and striking action, those about
him were astounded.

Mauki's father was chief over the village at Port Adams, and thus, by birth a salt-water man,
Mauki was half amphibian. He knew the way of the fishes and oysters, and the reef was an open
book to him. Canoes, also, he knew. He learned to swim when he was a year old. At seven years
he could hold his breath a full minute and swim straight down to bottom through thirty feet
of water. And at seven years he was stolen by the bushmen, who cannot even swim and who are
afraid of salt water. Thereafter Mauki saw the sea only from a distance, through rifts in the
jungle and from open spaces on the high mountain sides. He became the slave of old Fanfoa,
head chief over a score of scattered bush-villages on the range-lips of Malaita, the smoke
of which, on calm mornings, is about the only evidence the seafaring white men have of the
teeming interior population. For the whites do not penetrate Malaita. They tried it once, in
the days when the search was on for gold, but they always left their heads behind to grin from
the smoky rafters of the bushmen's huts.

When Mauki was a young man of seventeen, Fanfoa got out of tobacco. He got dreadfully out of
tobacco. It was hard times in all his villages. He had been guilty of a mistake. Suo was a
harbor so small that a large schooner could not swing at anchor in it. It was surrounded by
mangroves that overhung the deep water. It was a trap, and into the trap sailed two white men
in a small ketch. They were after recruits, and they possessed much tobacco and trade goods,
to say nothing of three rifles and plenty of ammunition. Now there were no salt-water men living
at Suo, and it was there that the bushmen could come down to the sea. The ketch did a splendid
traffic. It signed on twenty recruits the first day. Even old Fanfoa signed on. And that same
day the score of new recruits chopped off the two white men's head, killed the boat's crew,
and burned the ketch. Thereafter, and for three months, there was tobacco and trade goods in
plenty and to spare in all the bush villages. Then came the man-of-war that threw shells for
miles into the hills, frightening the people out of their villages and into the deeper bush.
Next the man-of-war sent landing parties ashore. The villages were all burned, along with the
tobacco and trade stuff.

The cocoanuts and bananas were chopped down, the taro gardens uprooted, and the pigs and chickens
killed.

It taught Fanfoa a lesson, but in the meantime he was out of tobacco. Also, his young men were
too frightened to sign on with the recruiting vessels. That was why Fanfoa ordered his slave,
Mauki, to be carried down and signed on for half a case of tobacco advance, along with knives,
axes, calico, and beads, which he would pay for with his toil on the plantations. Mauki was
sorely frightened when they brought him on board the schooner. He was a lamb led to the slaughter.
White men were ferocious creatures. They had to be, or else they would not make a practice
of venturing along the Malaita coast and into all harbors, two on a schooner, when each schooner
carried from fifteen to twenty blacks as boat's crew, and often as high as sixty or seventy
black recruits. In addition to this, there was always the danger of the shore population, the
sudden attack and the cutting off of the schooner and all hands. Truly, white men must be terrible.
Besides, they were possessed of such devil-devils--rifles that shot very rapidly many times,
things of iron and brass that made the schooners go when there was no wind, and boxes that
talked and laughed just as men talked and laughed.

Ay, and he had heard of one white man whose particular devil-devil was so powerful that he
could take out all his teeth and put them back at will.

Down into the cabin they took Mauki. On deck, the one white man kept guard with two revolvers
in his belt. In the cabin the other white man sat with a book before him, in which he inscribed
strange marks and lines. He looked at Mauki as though he had been a pig or a fowl, glanced
under the hollows of his arms, and wrote in the book. Then he held out the writing stick and
Mauki just barely touched it with his hand, in so doing pledging himself to toil for three
years on the plantations of the Moongleam Soap Company. It was not explained to him that the
will of the ferocious white men would be used to enforce the pledge, and that, behind all,
for the same use, was all the power and all the warships of Great Britain.

Other blacks there were on board, from unheard-of far places, and when the white man spoke
to them, they tore the long feather from Mauki's hair, cut that same hair short, and wrapped
about his waist a lava-lava of bright yellow calico.

After many days on the schooner, and after beholding more land and islands than he had ever
dreamed of, he was landed on New Georgia, and put to work in the field clearing jungle and
cutting cane grass. For the first time he knew what work was. Even as a slave to Fanfoa he
had not worked like this. And he did not like work. It was up at dawn and in at dark, on two
meals a day. And the food was tiresome. For weeks at a time they were given nothing but sweet
potatoes to eat, and for weeks at a time it would be nothing but rice. He cut out the cocoanut
from the shells day after day; and for long days and weeks he fed the fires that smoked the
copra, till his eyes got sore and he was set to felling trees. He was a good axe-man, and later
he was put in the bridge-building gang. Once, he was punished by being put in the road-building
gang. At times he served as boat's crew in the whale boats, when they brought in copra from
distant beaches or when the white men went out to dynamite fish.

Among other things he learned beche-de-mer English, with which he could talk with all white
men, and with all recruits who otherwise would have talked in a thousand different dialects.
Also, he learned certain things about the white men, principally that they kept their word.
If they told a boy he was going to receive a stick of tobacco, he got it. If they told a boy
they would knock seven bells out of him if he did a certain thing, when he did that thing,
seven bells invariably were knocked out of him. Mauki did not know what seven bells were, but
they occurred in beche-de-mer, and he imagined them to be the blood and teeth that sometimes
accompanied the process of knocking out seven bells. One other thing he learned: no boy was
struck or punished unless he did wrong. Even when the white men were drunk, as they were frequently,
they never struck unless a rule had been broken.

Mauki did not like the plantation. He hated work, and he was the son of a chief. Furthermore,
it was ten years since he had been stolen from Port Adams by Fanfoa, and he was homesick. He
was even homesick for the slavery under Fanfoa. So he ran away. He struck back into the bush,
with the idea of working southward to the beach and stealing a canoe in which to go home to
Port Adams.

But the fever got him, and he was captured and brought back more dead than alive.

A second time he ran away, in the company of two Malaita boys. They got down the coast twenty
miles, and were hidden in the hut of a Malaita freeman, who dwelt in that village. But in the
dead of night two white men came, who were not afraid of all the village people and who knocked
seven bells out of the three runaways, tied them like pigs, and tossed them into the whale
boat. But the man in whose house they had hidden--seven times seven bells must have been knocked
out of him from the way the hair, skin, and teeth flew, and he was discouraged for the rest
of his natural life from harboring runaway laborers.

For a year Mauki toiled on. Then he was made a house-boy, and had good food and easy times,
with light work in keeping the house clean and serving the white men with whiskey and beer
at all hours of the day and most hours of the night. He liked it, but he liked Port Adams more.
He had two years longer to serve, but two years were too long for him in the throes of homesickness.
He had grown wiser with his year of service, and, being now a house-boy, he had opportunity.
He had the cleaning of the rifles, and he knew where the key to the store room was hung. He
planned to escape, and one night ten Malaita boys and one boy from San Cristoval sneaked from
the barracks and dragged one of the whale boats down to the beach. It was Mauki who supplied
the key that opened the padlock on the boat, and it was Mauki who equipped the boat with a
dozen Winchesters, an immense amount of ammunition, a case of dynamite with detonators and
fuse, and ten cases of tobacco.

The northwest monsoon was blowing, and they fled south in the night time, hiding by day on
detached and uninhabited islets, or dragging their whale boat into the bush on the large islands.
Thus they gained Guadalcanar, skirted halfway along it, and crossed the Indispensable Straits
to Florida Island. It was here that they killed the San Cristoval boy, saving his head and
cooking and eating the rest of him. The Malaita coast was only twenty miles away, but the last
night a strong current and baffling winds prevented them from gaining across. Daylight found
them still several miles from their goal. But daylight brought a cutter, in which were two
white men, who were not afraid of eleven Malaita men armed with twelve rifles. Mauki and his
companions were carried back to Tulagi, where lived the great white master of all the white
men. And the great white master held a court, after which, one by one, the runaways were tied
up and given twenty lashes each, and sentenced to a fine of fifteen dollars. They were sent
back to New Georgia, where the white men knocked seven bells out of them all around and put
them to work. But Mauki was no longer house-boy. He was put in the road-making gang. The fine
of fifteen dollars had been paid by the white men from whom he had run away, and he was told
that he would have to work it out, which meant six months' additional toil. Further, his share
of the stolen tobacco earned him another year of toil.

Port Adams was now three years and a half away, so he stole a canoe one night, hid on the islets
in Manning Straits, passed through the Straits, and began working along the eastern coast of
Ysabel, only to be captured, two-thirds of the way along, by the white men on Meringe Lagoon.
After a week, he escaped from them and took to the bush. There were no bush natives on Ysabel,
only salt-water men, who were all Christians. The white men put up a reward of five-hundred
sticks of tobacco, and every time Mauki ventured down to the sea to steal a canoe he was chased
by the salt-water men. Four months of this passed, when, the reward having been raised to a
thousand sticks, he was caught and sent back to New Georgia and the road-building gang. Now
a thousand sticks are worth fifty dollars, and Mauki had to pay the reward himself, which required
a year and eight months' labor. So Port Adams was now five years away.

His homesickness was greater than ever, and it did not appeal to him to settle down and be
good, work out his four years, and go home. The next time, he was caught in the very act of
running away. His case was brought before Mr. Haveby, the island manager of the Moongleam Soap
Company, who adjudged him an incorrigible. The Company had plantations on the Santa Cruz Islands,
hundreds of miles across the sea, and there it sent its Solomon Islands' incorrigibles. And
there Mauki was sent, though he never arrived. The schooner stopped at Santa Anna, and in the
night Mauki swam ashore, where he stole two rifles and a case of tobacco from the trader and
got away in a canoe to Cristoval. Malaita was now to the north, fifty or sixty miles away.
But when he attempted the passage, he was caught by a light gale and driven back to Santa Anna,
where the trader clapped him in irons and held him against the return of the schooner from
Santa Cruz. The two rifles the trader recovered, but the case of tobacco was charged up to
Mauki at the rate of another year. The sum of years he now owed the Company was six.

On the way back to New Georgia, the schooner dropped anchor in Marau Sound, which lies at the
southeastern extremity of Guadalcanar. Mauki swam ashore with handcuffs on his wrists and got
away to the bush. The schooner went on, but the Moongleam trader ashore offered a thousand
sticks, and to him Mauki was brought by the bushmen with a year and eight months tacked on
to his account. Again, and before the schooner called in, he got away, this time in a whale
boat accompanied by a case of the trader's tobacco. But a northwest gale wrecked him upon Ugi,
where the Christian natives stole his tobacco and turned him over to the Moongleam trader who
resided there. The tobacco the natives stole meant another year for him, and the tale was now
eight years and a half.

"We'll send him to Lord Howe," said Mr. Haveby. "Bunster is there, and we'll let them settle
it between them. It will be a case, I imagine, of Mauki getting Bunster, or Bunster getting
Mauki, and good riddance in either event."

If one leaves Meringe Lagoon, on Ysabel, and steers a course due north, magnetic, at the end
of one hundred and fifty miles he will lift the pounded coral beaches of Lord Howe above the
sea. Lord Howe is a ring of land some one hundred and fifty miles in circumference, several
hundred yards wide at its widest, and towering in places to a height of ten feet above sea
level. Inside this ring of sand is a mighty lagoon studded with coral patches. Lord Howe belongs
to the Solomons neither geographically nor ethnologically. It is an atoll, while the Solomons
are high islands; and its people and language are Polynesian, while the inhabitants of the
Solomons are Melanesian.

Lord Howe has been populated by the westward Polynesian drift which continues to this day,
big outrigger canoes being washed upon its beaches by the southeast trade. That there has been
a slight Melanesian drift in the period of the northwest monsoon, is also evident.

Nobody ever comes to Lord Howe, or Ontong-Java as it is sometimes called. Thomas Cook & Son
do not sell tickets to it, and tourists do not dream of its existence. Not even a white missionary
has landed on its shore. Its five thousand natives are as peaceable as they are primitive.
Yet they were not always peaceable. The Sailing Directions speak of them as hostile and treacherous.
But the men who compile the Sailing Directions have never heard of the change that was worked
in the hearts of the inhabitants, who, not many years ago, cut off a big bark and killed all
hands with the exception of the second mate. The survivor carried the news to his brothers.
The captains of three trading schooners returned with him to Lord Howe. They sailed their vessels
right into the lagoon and proceeded to preach the white man's gospel that only white men shall
kill white men and that the lesser breeds must keep hands off. The schooners sailed up and
down the lagoon, harrying and destroying. There was no escape from the narrow sand-circle,
no bush to which to flee. The men were shot down at sight, and there was no avoiding being
sighted. The villages were burned, the canoes smashed, the chickens and pigs killed, and the
precious cocoanut trees chopped down. For a month this continued, when the schooner sailed
away; but the fear of the white man had been seared into the souls of the islanders and never
again were they rash enough to harm one.

Max Bunster was the one white man on Lord Howe, trading in the pay of the ubiquitous Moongleam
Soap Company. And the Company billeted him on Lord Howe, because, next to getting rid of him,
it was the most out-of-the-way place to be found. That the Company did not get rid of him was
due to the difficulty of finding another man to take his place. He was a strapping big German,
with something wrong in his brain. Semi-madness would be a charitable statement of his condition.
He was a bully and a coward, and a thrice-bigger savage than any savage on the island.

Being a coward, his brutality was of the cowardly order. When he first went into the Company's
employ, he was stationed on Savo. When a consumptive colonial was sent to take his place, he
beat him up with his fists and sent him off a wreck in the schooner that brought him.

Mr. Haveby next selected a young Yorkshire giant to relieve Bunster. The Yorkshire man had
a reputation as a bruiser and preferred fighting to eating. But Bunster wouldn't fight. He
was a regular little lamb--for ten days, at the end of which time the Yorkshire man was prostrated
by a combined attack of dysentery and fever. Then Bunster went for him, among other things
getting him down and jumping on him a score or so of times. Afraid of what would happen when
his victim recovered. Bunster fled away in a cutter to Guvutu, where he signalized himself
by beating up a young Englishman already crippled by a Boer bullet through both hips.

Then it was that Mr. Haveby sent Bunster to Lord Howe, the falling-off place. He celebrated
his landing by mopping up half a case of gin and by thrashing the elderly and wheezy mate of
the schooner which had brought him. When the schooner departed, he called the kanakas down
to the beach and challenged them to throw him in a wrestling bout, promising a case of tobacco
to the one who succeeded. Three kanakas he threw, but was promptly thrown by a fourth, who,
instead of receiving the tobacco, got a bullet through his lungs.

And so began Bunster's reign on Lord Howe. Three thousand people lived in the principal village;
but it was deserted, even in broad day, when he passed through. Men, women, and children fled
before him. Even the dogs and pigs got out of the way, while the king was not above hiding
under a mat. The two prime ministers lived in terror of Bunster, who never discussed any moot
subject, but struck out with his fists instead.

And to Lord Howe came Mauki, to toil for Bunster for eight long years and a half. There was
no escaping from Lord Howe. For better or worse, Bunster and he were tied together. Bunster
weighed two hundred pounds. Mauki weighed one hundred and ten. Bunster was a degenerate brute.
But Mauki was a primitive savage. While both had wills and ways of their own.

Mauki had no idea of the sort of master he was to work for. He had had no warnings, and he
had concluded as a matter of course that Bunster would be like other white men, a drinker of
much whiskey, a ruler and a lawgiver who always kept his word and who never struck a boy undeserved.
Bunster had the advantage. He knew all about Mauki, and gloated over the coming into possession
of him. The last cook was suffering from a broken arm and a dislocated shoulder, so Bunster
made Mauki cook and general house-boy.

And Mauki soon learned that there were white men and white men. On the very day the schooner
departed he was ordered to buy a chicken from Samisee, the native Tongan missionary. But Samisee
had sailed across the lagoon and would not be back for three days. Mauki returned with the
information. He climbed the steep stairway (the house stood on piles twelve feet above the
sand), and entered the living room to report. The trader demanded the chicken. Mauki opened
his mouth to explain the missionary's absence. But Bunster did not care for explanations. He
struck out with his fist. The blow caught Mauki on the mouth and lifted him into the air. Clear
through the doorway he flew, across the narrow veranda, breaking the top railing, and down
to the ground.

His lips were a contused, shapeless mass, and his mouth was full of blood and broken teeth.

"That'll teach you that back talk don't go with me," the trader shouted, purple with rage,
peering down at him over the broken railing.

Mauki had never met a white man like this, and he resolved to walk small and never offend.
He saw the boat boys knocked about, and one of them put in irons for three days with nothing
to eat for the crime of breaking a rowlock while pulling. Then, too, he heard the gossip of
the village and learned why Bunster had taken a third wife--by force, as was well known. The
first and second wives lay in the graveyard, under the white coral sand, with slabs of coral
rock at head and feet. They had died, it was said, from beatings he had given them. The third
wife was certainly ill-used, as Mauki could see for himself.

But there was no way by which to avoid offending the white man who seemed offended with life.
When Mauki kept silent, he was struck and called a sullen brute. When he spoke, he was struck
for giving back talk. When he was grave, Bunster accused him of plotting and gave him a thrashing
in advance; and when he strove to be cheerful and to smile, he was charged with sneering at
his lord and master and given a taste of stick. Bunster was a devil.

The village would have done for him, had it not remembered the lesson of the three schooners.
It might have done for him anyway, if there had been a bush to which to flee. As it was, the
murder of the white men, of any white man, would bring a man-of-war that would kill the offenders
and chop down the precious cocoanut trees. Then there were the boat boys, with minds fully
made up to drown him by accident at the first opportunity to capsize the cutter. Only Bunster
saw to it that the boat did not capsize.

Mauki was of a different breed, and escape being impossible while Bunster lived, he was resolved
to get the white man. The trouble was that he could never find a chance. Bunster was always
on guard. Day and night his revolvers were ready to hand. He permitted nobody to pass behind
his back, as Mauki learned after having been knocked down several times. Bunster knew that
he had more to fear from the good-natured, even sweet-faced, Malaita boy than from the entire
population of Lord Howe; and it gave added zest to the programme of torment he was carrying
out. And Mauki walked small, accepted his punishments, and waited.

All other white men had respected his tambos, but not so Bunster.

Mauki's weekly allowance of tobacco was two sticks. Bunster passed them to his woman and ordered
Mauki to receive them from her hand. But this could not be, and Mauki went without his tobacco.
In the same way he was made to miss many a meal, and to go hungry many a day. He was ordered
to make chowder out of the big clams that grew in the lagoon. This he could not do, for clams
were tambo. Six times in succession he refused to touch the clams, and six times he was knocked
senseless. Bunster knew that the boy would die first, but called his refusal mutiny, and would
have killed him had there been another cook to take his place.

One of the trader's favorite tricks was to catch Mauki's kinky locks and bat his head against
the wall. Another trick was to catch Mauki unawares and thrust the live end of a cigar against
his flesh. This Bunster called vaccination, and Mauki was vaccinated a number of times a week.
Once, in a rage, Bunster ripped the cup handle from Mauki's nose, tearing the hole clear out
of the cartilage.

"Oh, what a mug!" was his comment, when he surveyed the damage he had wrought.

The skin of a shark is like sandpaper, but the skin of a ray fish is like a rasp. In the South
Seas the natives use it as a wood file in smoothing down canoes and paddles. Bunster had a
mitten made of ray fish skin. The first time he tried it on Mauki, with one sweep of the hand
it fetched the skin off his back from neck to armpit. Bunster was delighted. He gave his wife
a taste of the mitten, and tried it out thoroughly on the boat boys. The prime ministers came
in for a stroke each, and they had to grin and take it for a joke.

"Laugh, damn you, laugh!" was the cue he gave.

Mauki came in for the largest share of the mitten. Never a day passed without a caress from
it. There were times when the loss of so much cuticle kept him awake at night, and often the
half-healed surface was raked raw afresh by the facetious Mr. Bunster. Mauki continued his
patient wait, secure in the knowledge that sooner or later his time would come. And he knew
just what he was going to do, down to the smallest detail, when the time did come.

One morning Bunster got up in a mood for knocking seven bells out of the universe. He began
on Mauki, and wound up on Mauki, in the interval knocking down his wife and hammering all the
boat boys. At breakfast he called the coffee slops and threw the scalding contents of the cup
into Mauki's face. By ten o'clock Bunster was shivering with ague, and half an hour later he
was burning with fever. It was no ordinary attack. It quickly became pernicious, and developed
into black-water fever. The days passed, and he grew weaker and weaker, never leaving his bed.
Mauki waited and watched, the while his skin grew intact once more. He ordered the boys to
beach the cutter, scrub her bottom, and give her a general overhauling. They thought the order
emanated from Bunster, and they obeyed. But Bunster at the time was lying unconscious and giving
no orders. This was Mauki's chance, but still he waited.

When the worst was past, and Bunster lay convalescent and conscious, but weak as a baby, Mauki
packed his few trinkets, including the china cup handle, into his trade box. Then he went over
to the village and interviewed the king and his two prime ministers.

"This fella Bunster, him good fella you like too much?" he asked.

They explained in one voice that they liked the trader not at all. The ministers poured forth
a recital of all the indignities and wrongs that had been heaped upon them. The king broke
down and wept. Mauki interrupted rudely.

"You savve me--me big fella marster my country. You no like 'm this fella white marster. Me
no like 'm. Plenty good you put hundred cocoanut, two hundred cocoanut, three hundred cocoanut
along cutter. Him finish, you go sleep 'm good fella. Altogether kanaka sleep m good fella.
Bime by big fella noise along house, you no savve hear 'm that fella noise. You altogether
sleep strong fella too much."

In like manner Mauki interviewed the boat boys. Then he ordered Bunster's wife to return to
her family house. Had she refused, he would have been in a quandary, for his tambo would not
have permitted him to lay hands on her.

The house deserted, he entered the sleeping room, where the trader lay in a doze. Mauki first
removed the revolvers, then placed the ray fish mitten on his hand. Bunster's first warning
was a stroke of the mitten that removed the skin the full length of his nose.

"Good fella, eh?" Mauki grinned, between two strokes, one of which swept the forehead bare
and the other of which cleaned off one side of his face. "Laugh, damn you, laugh."

Mauki did his work throughly, and the kanakas, hiding in their houses, heard the "big fella
noise" that Bunster made and continued to make for an hour or more.

When Mauki was done, he carried the boat compass and all the rifles and ammunition down to
the cutter, which he proceeded to ballast with cases of tobacco. It was while engaged in this
that a hideous, skinless thing came out of the house and ran screaming down the beach till
it fell in the sand and mowed and gibbered under the scorching sun. Mauki looked toward it
and hesitated. Then he went over and removed the head, which he wrapped in a mat and stowed
in the stern locker of the cutter.

So soundly did the kanakas sleep through that long hot day that they did not see the cutter
run out through the passage and head south, close-hauled on the southeast trade. Nor was the
cutter ever sighted on that long tack to the shores of Ysabel, and during the tedious head-beat
from there to Malaita. He landed at Port Adams with a wealth of rifles and tobacco such as
no one man had ever possessed before. But he did not stop there. He had taken a white man's
head, and only the bush could shelter him. So back he went to the bush villages, where he shot
old Fanfoa and half a dozen of the chief men, and made himself the chief over all the villages.
When his father died, Mauki's brother ruled in Port Adams, and joined together, salt-water
men and bushmen, the resulting combination was the strongest of the ten score fighting tribes
of Malaita.

More than his fear of the British government was Mauki's fear of the all-powerful Moongleam
Soap Company; and one day a message came up to him in the bush, reminding him that he owed
the Company eight and one-half years of labor. He sent back a favorable answer, and then appeared
the inevitable white man, the captain of the schooner, the only white man during Mauki's reign,
who ventured the bush and came out alive. This man not only came out, but he brought with him
seven hundred and fifty dollars in gold sovereigns--the money price of eight years and a half
of labor plus the cost price of certain rifles and cases of tobacco.

Mauki no longer weighs one hundred and ten pounds. His stomach is three times its former girth,
and he has four wives. He has many other things--rifles and revolvers, the handle of a china
cup, and an excellent collection of bushmen's heads. But more precious than the entire collection
is another head, perfectly dried and cured, with sandy hair and a yellowish beard, which is
kept wrapped in the finest of fibre lava-lavas. When Mauki goes to war with villages beyond
his realm, he invariably gets out this head, and alone in his grass palace, contemplates it
long and solemnly. At such times the hush of death falls on the village, and not even a pickaninny
dares make a noise. The head is esteemed the most powerful devil-devil on Malaita, and to the
possession of it is ascribed all of Mauki's greatness.

"YAH! YAH! YAH!"

He was a whiskey-guzzling Scotchman, and he downed his whiskey neat, beginning with his first
tot punctually at six in the morning, and thereafter repeating it at regular intervals throughout
the day till bedtime, which was usually midnight. He slept but five hours out of the twenty-four,
and for the remaining nineteen hours he was quietly and decently drunk. During the eight weeks
I spent with him on Oolong Atoll, I never saw him draw a sober breath. In fact, his sleep was
so short that he never had time to sober up. It was the most beautiful and orderly perennial
drunk I have ever observed.

McAllister was his name. He was an old man, and very shaky on his pins. His hand trembled as
with a palsy, especially noticeable when he poured his whiskey, though I never knew him to
spill a drop. He had been twenty-eight years in Melanesia, ranging from German New Guinea to
the German Solomons, and so thoroughly had he become identified with that portion of the world,
that he habitually spoke in that bastard lingo called "bech-de-mer." Thus, in conversation
with me, SUN HE COME UP meant sunrise; KAI-KAI HE STOP meant that dinner was served; and BELLY
BELONG ME WALK ABOUT meant that he was sick at his stomach. He was a small man, and a withered
one, burned inside and outside by ardent spirits and ardent sun. He was a cinder, a bit of
a clinker of a man, a little animated clinker, not yet quite cold, that moved stiffly and by
starts and jerks like an automaton. A gust of wind would have blown him away. He weighed ninety
pounds.

But the immense thing about him was the power with which he ruled. Oolong Atoll was one hundred
and forty miles in circumference. One steered by compass course in its lagoon. It was populated
by five thousand Polynesians, all strapping men and women, many of them standing six feet in
height and weighing a couple of hundred pounds. Oolong was two hundred and fifty miles from
the nearest land. Twice a year a little schooner called to collect copra. The one white man
on Oolong was McAllister, petty trader and unintermittent guzzler; and he ruled Oolong and
its six thousand savages with an iron hand. He said come, and they came, go, and they went.
They never questioned his will nor judgment. He was cantankerous as only an aged Scotchman
can be, and interfered continually in their personal affairs. When Nugu, the king's daughter,
wanted to marry Haunau from the other end of the atoll, her father said yes; but McAllister
said no, and the marriage never came off. When the king wanted to buy a certain islet in the
lagoon from the chief priest, McAllister said no. The king was in debt to the Company to the
tune of 180,000 cocoanuts, and until that was paid he was not to spend a single cocoanut on
anything else.

And yet the king and his people did not love McAllister. In truth, they hated him horribly,
and, to my knowledge, the whole population, with the priests at the head, tried vainly for
three months to pray him to death. The devil-devils they sent after him were awe-inspiring,
but since McAllister did not believe in devil-devils, they were without power over him. With
drunken Scotchmen all signs fail. They gathered up scraps of food which had touched his lips,
an empty whiskey bottle, a cocoanut from which he had drunk, and even his spittle, and performed
all kinds of deviltries over them. But McAllister lived on. His health was superb. He never
caught fever; nor coughs nor colds; dysentery passed him by; and the malignant ulcers and vile
skin diseases that attack blacks and whites alike in that climate never fastened upon him.
He must have been so saturated with alcohol as to defy the lodgment of germs. I used to imagine
them falling to the ground in showers of microscopic cinders as fast as they entered his whiskey-sodden
aura. No one loved him, not even germs, while he loved only whiskey, and still he lived.

I was puzzled. I could not understand six thousand natives putting up with that withered shrimp
of a tyrant. It was a miracle that he had not died suddenly long since. Unlike the cowardly
Melanesians, the people were high-stomached and warlike. In the big graveyard, at head and
feet of the graves, were relics of past sanguinary history--blubber-spades, rusty old bayonets
and cutlasses, copper bolts, rudder-irons, harpoons, bomb guns, bricks that could have come
from nowhere but a whaler's trying-out furnace, and old brass pieces of the sixteenth century
that verified the traditions of the early Spanish navigators. Ship after ship had come to grief
on Oolong. Not thirty years before, the whaler BLENNERDALE, running into the lagoon for repair,
had been cut off with all hands. In similar fashion had the crew of the GASKET, a sandalwood
trader, perished. There was a big French bark, the TOULON, becalmed off the atoll, which the
islanders boarded after a sharp tussle and wrecked in the Lipau Passage, the captain and a
handful of sailors escaping in the longboat. Then there were the Spanish pieces, which told
of the loss of one of the early explorers. All this, of the vessels named, is a matter of history,
and is to be found in the SOUTH PACIFIC SAILING DIRECTORY. But that there was other history,
unwritten, I was yet to learn. In the meantime I puzzled why six thousand primitive savages
let one degenerate Scotch despot live.

One hot afternoon McAllister and I sat on the veranda looking out over the lagoon, with all
its wonder of jeweled colors. At our backs, across the hundred yards of palm-studded sand,
the outer surf roared on the reef. It was dreadfully warm. We were in four degree south latitude
and the sun was directly overhead, having crossed the Line a few days before on its journey
south. There was no wind--not even a catspaw. The season of the southeast trade was drawing
to an early close, and the northwest monsoon had not yet begun to blow.

"They can't dance worth a damn," said McAllister.

I had happened to mention that the Polynesian dances were superior to the Papuan, and this
McAllister had denied, for no other reason than his cantankerousness. But it was too hot to
argue, and I said nothing. Besides, I had never seen the Oolong people dance.

"I'll prove it to you," he announced, beckoning to the black New Hanover boy, a labor recruit,
who served as cook and general house servant. "Hey, you, boy, you tell 'm one fella king come
along me."

The boy departed, and back came the prime minister, perturbed, ill at ease, and garrulous with
apologetic explanation. In short, the king slept, and was not to be disturbed.

"King he plenty strong fella sleep," was his final sentence.

McAllister was in such a rage that the prime minister incontinently fled, to return with the
king himself. They were a magnificent pair, the king especially, who must have been all of
six feet three inches in height. His features had the eagle-like quality that is so frequently
found in those of the North American Indian. He had been molded and born to rule. His eyes
flashed as he listened, but right meekly he obeyed McAllister's command to fetch a couple of
hundred of the best dancers, male and female, in the village. And dance they did, for two mortal
hours, under that broiling sun. They did not love him for it, and little he cared, in the end
dismissing them with abuse and sneers.

The abject servility of those magnificent savages was terrifying. How could it be? What was
the secret of his rule? More and more I puzzled as the days went by, and though I observed
perpetual examples of his undisputed sovereignty, never a clew was there as to how it was.

One day I happened to speak of my disappointment in failing to trade for a beautiful pair of
orange cowries. The pair was worth five pounds in Sydney if it was worth a cent. I had offered
two hundred sticks of tobacco to the owner, who had held out for three hundred. When I casually
mentioned the situation, McAllister immediately sent for the man, took the shells from him,
and turned them over to me. Fifty sticks were all he permitted me to pay for them. The man
accepted the tobacco and seemed overjoyed at getting off so easily. As for me, I resolved to
keep a bridle on my tongue in the future. And still I mulled over the secret of McAllister's
power. I even went to the extent of asking him directly, but all he did was to cock one eye,
look wise, and take another drink.

One night I was out fishing in the lagoon with Oti, the man who had been mulcted of the cowries.
Privily, I had made up to him an additional hundred and fifty sticks, and he had come to regard
me with a respect that was almost veneration, which was curious, seeing that he was an old
man, twice my age at least.

"What name you fella kanaka all the same pickaninny?" I began on him. "This fella trader he
one fella. You fella kanaka plenty fella too much. You fella kanaka just like 'm dog--plenty
fright along that fella trader. He no eat you, fella. He no get 'm teeth along him. What name
you too much fright?"

"S'pose plenty fella kanaka kill 'm?" he asked.

"He die," I retorted. "You fella kanaka kill 'm plenty fella white man long time before. What
name you fright this fella white man?"

"Yes, we kill 'm plenty," was his answer. "My word! Any amount! Long time before. One time,
me young fella too much, one big fella ship he stop outside. Wind he no blow. Plenty fella
kanaka we get 'm canoe, plenty fella canoe, we go catch 'm that fella ship. My word--we catch
'm big fella fight. Two, three white men shoot like hell. We no fright. We come alongside,
we go up side, plenty fella, maybe I think fifty-ten (five hundred). One fella white Mary (woman)
belong that fella ship. Never before I see 'm white Mary. Bime by plenty white man finish.
One fella skipper he no die. Five fella, six fella white man no die. Skipper he sing out. Some
fella white man he fight. Some fella white man he lower away boat. After that, all together
over the side they go. Skipper he sling white Mary down. After that they washee (row) strong
fella plenty too much. Father belong me, that time he strong fella. He throw 'm one fella spear.
That fella spear he go in one side that white Mary. He no stop. My word, he go out other side
that fella Mary. She finish. Me no fright. Plenty kanaka too much no fright."

Old Oti's pride had been touched, for he suddenly stripped down his lava-lava and showed me
the unmistakable scar of a bullet. Before I could speak, his line ran out suddenly. He checked
it and attempted to haul in, but found that the fish had run around a coral branch. Casting
a look of reproach at me for having beguiled him from his watchfulness, he went over the side,
feet first, turning over after he got under and following his line down to bottom. The water
was ten fathoms. I leaned over and watched the play of his feet, growing dim and dimmer, as
they stirred the wan phosphorescence into ghostly fires. Ten fathoms--sixty feet--it was nothing
to him, an old man, compared with the value of a hook and line. After what seemed five minutes,
though it could not have been more than a minute, I saw him flaming whitely upward. He broke
surface and dropped a ten pound rock cod into the canoe, the line and hook intact, the latter
still fast in the fish's mouth.

"It may be," I said remorselessly. "You no fright long ago. You plenty fright now along that
fella trader."

"Yes, plenty fright," he confessed, with an air of dismissing the subject. For half an hour
we pulled up our lines and flung them out in silence. Then small fish-sharks began to bite,
and after losing a hook apiece, we hauled in and waited for the sharks to go their way.

"I speak you true," Oti broke into speech, "then you savve we fright now."

I lighted up my pipe and waited, and the story that Oti told me in atrocious bech-de-mer I
here turn into proper English. Otherwise, in spirit and order of narrative, the tale is as
it fell from Oti's lips.

"It was after that that we were very proud. We had fought many times with the strange white
men who live upon the sea, and always we had beaten them. A few of us were killed, but what
was that compared with the stores of wealth of a thousand thousand kinds that we found on the
ships? And then one day, maybe twenty years ago, or twenty-five, there came a schooner right
through the passage and into the lagoon. It was a large schooner with three masts. She had
five white men and maybe forty boat's crew, black fellows from New Guinea and New Britain;
and she had come to fish beche-de-mer. She lay at anchor across the lagoon from here, at Pauloo,
and her boats scattered out everywhere, making camps on the beaches where they cured the beche-de-mer.
This made them weak by dividing them, for those who fished here and those on the schooner at
Pauloo were fifty miles apart, and there were others farther away still.

"Our king and headmen held council, and I was one in the canoe that paddled all afternoon and
all night across the lagoon, bringing word to the people of Pauloo that in the morning we would
attack the fishing camps at the one time and that it was for them to take the schooner. We
who brought the word were tired with the paddling, but we took part in the attack. On the schooner
were two white men, the skipper and the second mate, with half a dozen black boys. The skipper
with three boys we caught on shore and killed, but first eight of us the skipper killed with
his two revolvers. We fought close together, you see, at hand grapples.

"The noise of our fighting told the mate what was happening, and he put food and water and
a sail in the small dingy, which was so small that it was no more than twelve feet long. We
came down upon the schooner, a thousand men, covering the lagoon with our canoes. Also, we
were blowing conch shells, singing war songs, and striking the sides of the canoes with our
paddles. What chance had one white man and three black boys against us? No chance at all, and
the mate knew it.

"White men are hell. I have watched them much, and I am an old man now, and I understand at
last why the white men have taken to themselves all the islands in the sea. It is because they
are hell. Here are you in the canoe with me. You are hardly more than a boy. You are not wise,
for each day I tell you many things you do not know. When I was a little pickaninny, I knew
more about fish and the ways of fish than you know now. I am an old man, but I swim down to
the bottom of the lagoon, and you cannot follow me. What are you good for, anyway? I do not
know, except to fight. I have never seen you fight, yet I know that you are like your brothers
and that you will fight like hell. Also, you are a fool, like your brothers. You do not know
when you are beaten. You will fight until you die, and then it will be too late to know that
you are beaten.

"Now behold what this mate did. As we came down upon him, covering the sea and blowing our
conches, he put off from the schooner in the small boat, along with the three black boys, and
rowed for the passage. There again he was a fool, for no wise man would put out to sea in so
small a boat. The sides of it were not four inches above the water. Twenty canoes went after
him, filled with two hundred young men. We paddled five fathoms while his black boys were rowing
one fathom. He had no chance, but he was a fool. He stood up in the boat with a rifle, and
he shot many times. He was not a good shot, but as we drew close many of us were wounded and
killed. But still he had no chance.

"I remember that all the time he was smoking a cigar. When we were forty feet away and coming
fast, he dropped the rifle, lighted a stick of dynamite with the cigar, and threw it at us.
He lighted another and another, and threw them at us very rapidly, many of them. I know now
that he must have split the ends of the fuses and stuck in match heads, because they lighted
so quickly. Also, the fuses were very short. Sometimes the dynamite sticks went off in the
air, but most of them went off in the canoes. And each time they went off in a canoe, that
canoe was finished. Of the twenty canoes, the half were smashed to pieces. The canoe I was
in was so smashed, and likewise the two men who sat next to me. The dynamite fell between them.
The other canoes turned and ran away. Then that mate yelled, Yah! Yah! Yah!' at us. Also he
went at us again with his rifle, so that many were killed through the back as they fled away.
And all the time the black boys in the boat went on rowing. You see, I told you true, that
mate was hell.

"Nor was that all. Before he left the schooner, he set her on fire, and fixed up all the powder
and dynamite so that it would go off at one time. There were hundreds of us on board, trying
to put out the fire, heaving up water from overside, when the schooner blew up. So that all
we had fought for was lost to us, besides many more of us being killed. Sometimes, even now,
in my old age, I have bad dreams in which I hear that mate yell, Yah! Yah! Yah!' In a voice
of thunder he yells, Yah! Yah! Yah!' But all those in the fishing camps were killed.

"The mate went out of the passage in his little boat, and that was the end of him we made sure,
for how could so small a boat, with four men in it, live on the ocean? A month went by, and
then, one morning, between two rain squalls, a schooner sailed in through our passage and dropped
anchor before the village. The king and the headmen made big talk, and it was agreed that we
would take the schooner in two or three days. In the meantime, as it was our custom always
to appear friendly, we went off to her in canoes, bringing strings of cocoanuts, fowls, and
pigs, to trade. But when we were alongside, many canoes of us, the men on board began to shoot
us with rifles, and as we paddled away I saw the mate who had gone to sea in the little boat
spring upon the rail and dance and yell, Yah! Yah! Yah!'

"That afternoon they landed from the schooner in three small boats filled with white men. They
went right through the village, shooting every man they saw. Also they shot the fowls and pigs.
We who were not killed got away in canoes and paddled out into the lagoon. Looking back, we
could see all the houses on fire. Late in the afternoon we saw many canoes coming from Nihi,
which is the village near the Nihi Passage in the northeast. They were all that were left,
and like us their village had been burned by a second schooner that had come through Nihi Passage.

"We stood on in the darkness to the westward for Pauloo, but in the middle of the night we
heard women wailing and then we ran into a big fleet of canoes. They were all that were left
of Pauloo, which likewise was in ashes, for a third schooner had come in through the Pauloo
Passage. You see, that mate, with his black boys, had not been drowned. He had made the Solomon
Islands, and there told his brothers of what we had done in Oolong. And all his brothers had
said they would come and punish us, and there they were in the three schooners, and our three
villages were wiped out.

"And what was there for us to do? In the morning the two schooners from windward sailed down
upon us in the middle of the lagoon. The trade wind was blowing fresh, and by scores of canoes
they ran us down. And the rifles never ceased talking. We scattered like flying fish before
the bonita, and there were so many of us that we escaped by thousands, this way and that, to
the islands on the rim of the atoll.

"And thereafter the schooners hunted us up and down the lagoon. In the nighttime we slipped
past them. But the next day, or in two days or three days, the schooners would be coming back,
hunting us toward the other end of the lagoon. And so it went. We no longer counted nor remembered
our dead. True, we were many and they were few. But what could we do? I was in one of the twenty
canoes filled with men who were not afraid to die. We attacked the smallest schooner. They
shot us down in heaps. They threw dynamite into the canoes, and when the dynamite gave out,
they threw hot water down upon us. And the rifles never ceased talking. And those whose canoes
were smashed were shot as they swam away. And the mate danced up and down upon the cabin top
and yelled, 'Yah! Yah! Yah!'"

"Every house on every smallest island was burned. Not a pig nor a fowl was left alive. Our
wells were defiled with the bodies of the slain, or else heaped high with coral rock. We were
twenty-five thousand on Oolong before the three schooners came. Today we are five thousand.
After the schooners left, we were but three thousand, as you shall see.

"At last the three schooners grew tired of chasing us back and forth. So they went, the three
of them, to Nihi, in the northeast. And then they drove us steadily to the west. Their nine
boats were in the water as well. They beat up every island as they moved along. They drove
us, drove us, drove us day by day. And every night the three schooners and the nine boats made
a chain of watchfulness that stretched across the lagoon from rim to rim, so that we could
not escape back.

"They could not drive us forever that way, for the lagoon was only so large, and at last all
of us that yet lived were driven upon the last sand bank to the west. Beyond lay the open sea.
There were ten thousand of us, and we covered the sand bank from the lagoon edge to the pounding
surf on the other side. No one could lie down. There was no room. We stood hip to hip and shoulder
to shoulder. Two days they kept us there, and the mate would climb up in the rigging to mock
us and yell, Yah! Yah! Yah!' till we were well sorry that we had ever harmed him or his schooner
a month before. We had no food, and we stood on our feet two days and nights. The little babies
died, and the old and weak died, and the wounded died. And worst of all, we had no water to
quench our thirst, and for two days the sun beat down on us, and there was no shade. Many men
and women waded out into the ocean and were drowned, the surf casting their bodies back on
the beach. And there came a pest of flies. Some men swam to the sides of the schooners, but
they were shot to the last one. And we that lived were very sorry that in our pride we tried
to take the schooner with the three masts that came to fish for beche-de-mer.

"On the morning of the third day came the skippers of the three schooners and that mate in
a small boat. They carried rifles, all of them, and revolvers, and they made talk. It was only
that they were weary of killing us that they had stopped, they told us. And we told them that
we were sorry, that never again would we harm a white man, and in token of our submission we
poured sand upon our heads. And all the women and children set up a great wailing for water,
so that for some time no man could make himself heard. Then we were told our punishment. We
must fill the three schooners with copra and beche-de-mer. And we agreed, for we wanted water,
and our hearts were broken, and we knew that we were children at fighting when we fought with
white men who fight like hell. And when all the talk was finished, the mate stood up and mocked
us, and yelled, Yah! Yah! Yah!' After that we paddled away in our canoes and sought water.

"And for weeks we toiled at catching beche-de-mer and curing it, in gathering the cocoanuts
and turning them into copra. By day and night the smoke rose in clouds from all the beaches
of all the islands of Oolong as we paid the penalty of our wrongdoing. For in those days of
death it was burned clearly on all our brains that it was very wrong to harm a white man.

"By and by, the schooners full of copra and beche-de-mer and our trees empty of cocoanuts,
the three skippers and that mate called us all together for a big talk. And they said they
were very glad that we had learned our lesson, and we said for the ten-thousandth time that
we were sorry and that we would not do it again. Also, we poured sand upon our heads. Then
the skippers said that it was all very well, but just to show us that they did not forget us,
they would send a devil-devil that we would never forget and that we would always remember
any time we might feel like harming a white man. After that the mate mocked us one more time
and yelled, Yah! Yah! Yah!' Then six of our men, whom we thought long dead, were put ashore
from one of the schooners, and the schooners hoisted their sails and ran out through the passage
for the Solomons.

"The six men who were put ashore were the first to catch the devil-devil the skippers sent
back after us."

"A great sickness came," I interrupted, for I recognized the trick. The schooner had had measles
on board, and the six prisoners had been deliberately exposed to it.

"Yes, a great sickness," Oti went on. "It was a powerful devil-devil. The oldest man had never
heard of the like. Those of our priests that yet lived we killed because they could not overcome
the devil-devil. The sickness spread. I have said that there were ten thousand of us that stood
hip to hip and shoulder to shoulder on the sandbank. When the sickness left us, there were
three thousand yet alive. Also, having made all our cocoanuts into copra, there was a famine.

"That fella trader," Oti concluded, "he like 'm that much dirt. He like 'm clam he die KAI-KAI
(meat) he stop, stink 'm any amount. He like 'm one fella dog, one sick fella dog plenty fleas
stop along him. We no fright along that fella trader. We fright because he white man. We savve
plenty too much no good kill white man. That one fella sick dog trader he plenty brother stop
along him, white men like 'm you fight like hell. We no fright that damn trader. Some time
he made kanaka plenty cross along him and kanaka want 'm kill m, kanaka he think devil-devil
and kanaka he hear that fella mate sing out, Yah! Yah! Yah!' and kanaka no kill 'm."

Oti baited his hook with a piece of squid, which he tore with his teeth from the live and squirming
monster, and hook and bait sank in white flames to the bottom.

"Shark walk about he finish," he said. "I think we catch 'm plenty fella fish."

His line jerked savagely. He pulled it in rapidly, hand under hand, and landed a big gasping
rock cod in the bottom of the canoe.

"Sun he come up, I make 'm that dam fella trader one present big fella fish," said Oti.

THE HEATHEN

I met him first in a hurricane; and though we had gone through the hurricane on the same schooner,
it was not until the schooner had gone to pieces under us that I first laid eyes on him. Without
doubt I had seen him with the rest of the kanaka crew on board, but I had not consciously been
aware of his existence, for the Petite Jeanne was rather overcrowded. In addition to her eight
or ten kanaka seamen, her white captain, mate, and supercargo, and her six cabin passengers,
she sailed from Rangiroa with something like eighty-five deck passengers--Paumotans and Tahitians,
men, women, and children each with a trade box, to say nothing of sleeping mats, blankets,
and clothes bundles.

The pearling season in the Paumotus was over, and all hands were returning to Tahiti. The six
of us cabin passengers were pearl buyers. Two were Americans, one was Ah Choon (the whitest
Chinese I have ever known), one was a German, one was a Polish Jew, and I completed the half dozen.

It had been a prosperous season. Not one of us had cause for complaint, nor one of the eighty-five
deck passengers either. All had done well, and all were looking forward to a rest-off and a
good time in Papeete.

Of course, the Petite Jeanne was overloaded. She was only seventy tons, and she had no right
to carry a tithe of the mob she had on board. Beneath her hatches she was crammed and jammed
with pearl shell and copra. Even the trade room was packed full with shell. It was a miracle
that the sailors could work her. There was no moving about the decks. They simply climbed back
and forth along the rails.

In the night time they walked upon the sleepers, who carpeted the deck, I'll swear, two deep.
Oh! And there were pigs and chickens on deck, and sacks of yams, while every conceivable place
was festooned with strings of drinking cocoanuts and bunches of bananas. On both sides, between
the fore and main shrouds, guys had been stretched, just low enough for the foreboom to swing
clear; and from each of these guys at least fifty bunches of bananas were suspended.

It promised to be a messy passage, even if we did make it in the two or three days that would
have been required if the southeast trades had been blowing fresh. But they weren't blowing
fresh. After the first five hours the trade died away in a dozen or so gasping fans. The calm
continued all that night and the next day--one of those glaring, glassy, calms, when the very
thought of opening one's eyes to look at it is sufficient to cause a headache.

The second day a man died--an Easter Islander, one of the best divers that season in the lagoon.
Smallpox--that is what it was; though how smallpox could come on board, when there had been
no known cases ashore when we left Rangiroa, is beyond me. There it was, though--smallpox,
a man dead, and three others down on their backs.

There was nothing to be done. We could not segregate the sick, nor could we care for them.
We were packed like sardines. There was nothing to do but rot and die--that is, there was nothing
to do after the night that followed the first death. On that night, the mate, the supercargo,
the Polish Jew, and four native divers sneaked away in the large whale boat. They were never
heard of again. In the morning the captain promptly scuttled the remaining boats, and there
we were.

That day there were two deaths; the following day three; then it jumped to eight. It was curious
to see how we took it. The natives, for instance, fell into a condition of dumb, stolid fear.
The captain--Oudouse, his name was, a Frenchman--became very nervous and voluble. He actually
got the twitches. He was a large fleshy man, weighing at least two hundred pounds, and he quickly
became a faithful representation of a quivering jelly-mountain of fat.

The German, the two Americans, and myself bought up all the Scotch whiskey, and proceeded to
stay drunk. The theory was beautiful--namely, if we kept ourselves soaked in alcohol, every
smallpox germ that came into contact with us would immediately be scorched to a cinder. And
the theory worked, though I must confess that neither Captain Oudouse nor Ah Choon were attacked
by the disease either. The Frenchman did not drink at all, while Ah Choon restricted himself
to one drink daily.

It was a pretty time. The sun, going into northern declination, was straight overhead. There
was no wind, except for frequent squalls, which blew fiercely for from five minutes to half
an hour, and wound up by deluging us with rain. After each squall, the awful sun would come
out, drawing clouds of steam from the soaked decks.

The steam was not nice. It was the vapor of death, freighted with millions and millions of
germs. We always took another drink when we saw it going up from the dead and dying, and usually
we took two or three more drinks, mixing them exceptionally stiff. Also, we made it a rule
to take an additional several each time they hove the dead over to the sharks that swarmed
about us.

We had a week of it, and then the whiskey gave out. It is just as well, or I shouldn't be alive
now. It took a sober man to pull through what followed, as you will agree when I mention the
little fact that only two men did pull through. The other man was the heathen--at least, that
was what I heard Captain Oudouse call him at the moment I first became aware of the heathen's
existence. But to come back.

It was at the end of the week, with the whiskey gone, and the pearl buyers sober, that I happened
to glance at the barometer that hung in the cabin companionway. Its normal register in the
Paumotus was 29.90, and it was quite customary to see it vacillate between 29.85 and 30.00,
or even 30.05; but to see it as I saw it, down to 29.62, was sufficient to sober the most drunken
pearl buyer that ever incinerated smallpox microbes in Scotch whiskey.

I called Captain Oudouse's attention to it, only to be informed that he had watched it going
down for several hours. There was little to do, but that little he did very well, considering
the circumstances. He took off the light sails, shortened right down to storm canvas, spread
life lines, and waited for the wind. His mistake lay in what he did after the wind came. He
hove to on the port tack, which was the right thing to do south of the Equator, if--and there
was the rub--IF one were NOT in the direct path of the hurricane.

We were in the direct path. I could see that by the steady increase of the wind and the equally
steady fall of the barometer. I wanted him to turn and run with the wind on the port quarter
until the barometer ceased falling, and then to heave to. We argued till he was reduced to
hysteria, but budge he would not. The worst of it was that I could not get the rest of the
pearl buyers to back me up. Who was I, anyway, to know more about the sea and its ways than
a properly qualified captain? was what was in their minds, I knew.

Of course, the sea rose with the wind frightfully; and I shall never forget the first three
seas the Petite Jeanne shipped. She had fallen off, as vessels do at times when hove to, and
the first sea made a clean breach. The life lines were only for the strong and well, and little
good were they even for them when the women and children, the bananas and cocoanuts, the pigs
and trade boxes, the sick and the dying, were swept along in a solid, screeching, groaning mass.

The second sea filled the Petite Jeanne's decks flush with the rails; and, as her stern sank
down and her bow tossed skyward, all the miserable dunnage of life and luggage poured aft.
It was a human torrent. They came head first, feet first, sidewise, rolling over and over,
twisting, squirming, writhing, and crumpling up. Now and again one caught a grip on a stanchion
or a rope; but the weight of the bodies behind tore such grips loose.

One man I noticed fetch up, head on and square on, with the starboard bitt. His head cracked
like an egg. I saw what was coming, sprang on top of the cabin, and from there into the mainsail
itself. Ah Choon and one of the Americans tried to follow me, but I was one jump ahead of them.
The American was swept away and over the stern like a piece of chaff. Ah Choon caught a spoke
of the wheel, and swung in behind it. But a strapping Raratonga vahine (woman)--she must have
weighed two hundred and fifty--brought up against him, and got an arm around his neck. He clutched
the kanaka steersman with his other hand; and just at that moment the schooner flung down to
starboard.

The rush of bodies and sea that was coming along the port runway between the cabin and the
rail turned abruptly and poured to starboard. Away they went--vahine, Ah Choon, and steersman;
and I swear I saw Ah Choon grin at me with philosophic resignation as he cleared the rail and
went under.

The third sea--the biggest of the three--did not do so much damage. By the time it arrived
nearly everybody was in the rigging. On deck perhaps a dozen gasping, half-drowned, and half-stunned
wretches were rolling about or attempting to crawl into safety. They went by the board, as
did the wreckage of the two remaining boats. The other pearl buyers and myself, between seas,
managed to get about fifteen women and children into the cabin, and battened down. Little good
it did the poor creatures in the end.

Wind? Out of all my experience I could not have believed it possible for the wind to blow as
it did. There is no describing it. How can one describe a nightmare? It was the same way with
that wind. It tore the clothes off our bodies. I say TORE THEM OFF, and I mean it. I am not
asking you to believe it. I am merely telling something that I saw and felt. There are times
when I do not believe it myself. I went through it, and that is enough. One could not face
that wind and live. It was a monstrous thing, and the most monstrous thing about it was that
it increased and continued to increase.

Imagine countless millions and billions of tons of sand. Imagine this sand tearing along at
ninety, a hundred, a hundred and twenty, or any other number of miles per hour. Imagine, further,
this sand to be invisible, impalpable, yet to retain all the weight and density of sand. Do
all this, and you may get a vague inkling of what that wind was like.

Perhaps sand is not the right comparison. Consider it mud, invisible, impalpable, but heavy
as mud. Nay, it goes beyond that. Consider every molecule of air to be a mudbank in itself.
Then try to imagine the multitudinous impact of mudbanks. No; it is beyond me. Language may
be adequate to express the ordinary conditions of life, but it cannot possibly express any
of the conditions of so enormous a blast of wind. It would have been better had I stuck by
my original intention of not attempting a description.

I will say this much: The sea, which had risen at first, was beaten down by that wind. More:
it seemed as if the whole ocean had been sucked up in the maw of the hurricane, and hurled
on through that portion of space which previously had been occupied by the air.

Of course, our canvas had gone long before. But Captain Oudouse had on the Petite Jeanne something
I had never before seen on a South Sea schooner--a sea anchor. It was a conical canvas bag,
the mouth of which was kept open by a huge loop of iron. The sea anchor was bridled something
like a kite, so that it bit into the water as a kite bites into the air, but with a difference.
The sea anchor remained just under the surface of the ocean in a perpendicular position. A
long line, in turn, connected it with the schooner. As a result, the Petite Jeanne rode bow
on to the wind and to what sea there was.

The situation really would have been favorable had we not been in the path of the storm. True,
the wind itself tore our canvas out of the gaskets, jerked out our topmasts, and made a raffle
of our running gear, but still we would have come through nicely had we not been square in
front of the advancing storm center. That was what fixed us. I was in a state of stunned, numbed,
paralyzed collapse from enduring the impact of the wind, and I think I was just about ready
to give up and die when the center smote us. The blow we received was an absolute lull. There
was not a breath of air. The effect on one was sickening.

Remember that for hours we had been at terrific muscular tension, withstanding the awful pressure
of that wind. And then, suddenly, the pressure was removed. I know that I felt as though I
was about to expand, to fly apart in all directions. It seemed as if every atom composing my
body was repelling every other atom and was on the verge of rushing off irresistibly into space.
But that lasted only for a moment. Destruction was upon us.

In the absence of the wind and pressure the sea rose. It jumped, it leaped, it soared straight
toward the clouds. Remember, from every point of the compass that inconceivable wind was blowing
in toward the center of calm. The result was that the seas sprang up from every point of the
compass. There was no wind to check them. They popped up like corks released from the bottom
of a pail of water. There was no system to them, no stability. They were hollow, maniacal seas.
They were eighty feet high at the least. They were not seas at all. They resembled no sea a
man had ever seen.

They were splashes, monstrous splashes--that is all. Splashes that were eighty feet high. Eighty!
They were more than eighty. They went over our mastheads. They were spouts, explosions. They
were drunken. They fell anywhere, anyhow. They jostled one another; they collided. They rushed
together and collapsed upon one another, or fell apart like a thousand waterfalls all at once.
It was no ocean any man had ever dreamed of, that hurricane center. It was confusion thrice
confounded. It was anarchy. It was a hell pit of sea water gone mad.

The Petite Jeanne? I don't know. The heathen told me afterwards that he did not know. She was
literally torn apart, ripped wide open, beaten into a pulp, smashed into kindling wood, annihilated.
When I came to I was in the water, swimming automatically, though I was about two-thirds drowned.
How I got there I had no recollection. I remembered seeing the Petite Jeanne fly to pieces
at what must have been the instant that my own consciousness was buffeted out of me. But there
I was, with nothing to do but make the best of it, and in that best there was little promise.
The wind was blowing again, the sea was much smaller and more regular, and I knew that I had
passed through the center. Fortunately, there were no sharks about. The hurricane had dissipated
the ravenous horde that had surrounded the death ship and fed off the dead.

It was about midday when the Petite Jeanne went to pieces, and it must have been two hours
afterwards when I picked up with one of her hatch covers. Thick rain was driving at the time;
and it was the merest chance that flung me and the hatch cover together. A short length of
line was trailing from the rope handle; and I knew that I was good for a day, at least, if
the sharks did not return. Three hours later, possibly a little longer, sticking close to the
cover, and with closed eyes, concentrating my whole soul upon the task of breathing in enough
air to keep me going and at the same time of avoiding breathing in enough water to drown me,
it seemed to me that I heard voices. The rain had ceased, and wind and sea were easing marvelously.
Not twenty feet away from me, on another hatch cover were Captain Oudouse and the heathen.
They were fighting over the possession of the cover--at least, the Frenchman was. "Paien noir!"
I heard him scream, and at the same time I saw him kick the kanaka.

Now, Captain Oudouse had lost all his clothes, except his shoes, and they were heavy brogans.
It was a cruel blow, for it caught the heathen on the mouth and the point of the chin, half
stunning him. I looked for him to retaliate, but he contented himself with swimming about forlornly
a safe ten feet away. Whenever a fling of the sea threw him closer, the Frenchman, hanging
on with his hands, kicked out at him with both feet. Also, at the moment of delivering each
kick, he called the kanaka a black heathen.

"For two centimes I'd come over there and drown you, you white beast!" I yelled.

The only reason I did not go was that I felt too tired. The very thought of the effort to swim
over was nauseating. So I called to the kanaka to come to me, and proceeded to share the hatch
cover with him. Otoo, he told me his name was (pronounced o-to-o ); also, he told me that he
was a native of Bora Bora, the most westerly of the Society Group. As I learned afterward,
he had got the hatch cover first, and, after some time, encountering Captain Oudouse, had offered
to share it with him, and had been kicked off for his pains.

And that was how Otoo and I first came together. He was no fighter. He was all sweetness and
gentleness, a love creature, though he stood nearly six feet tall and was muscled like a gladiator.
He was no fighter, but he was also no coward. He had the heart of a lion; and in the years
that followed I have seen him run risks that I would never dream of taking. What I mean is
that while he was no fighter, and while he always avoided precipitating a row, he never ran
away from trouble when it started. And it was "Ware shoal!" when once Otoo went into action.
I shall never forget what he did to Bill King. It occurred in German Samoa. Bill King was hailed
the champion heavyweight of the American Navy. He was a big brute of a man, a veritable gorilla,
one of those hard-hitting, rough-housing chaps, and clever with his fists as well. He picked
the quarrel, and he kicked Otoo twice and struck him once before Otoo felt it to be necessary
to fight. I don't think it lasted four minutes, at the end of which time Bill King was the
unhappy possessor of four broken ribs, a broken forearm, and a dislocated shoulder blade. Otoo
knew nothing of scientific boxing. He was merely a manhandler; and Bill King was something
like three months in recovering from the bit of manhandling he received that afternoon on Apia
beach.

But I am running ahead of my yarn. We shared the hatch cover between us. We took turn and turn
about, one lying flat on the cover and resting, while the other, submerged to the neck, merely
held on with his hands. For two days and nights, spell and spell, on the cover and in the water,
we drifted over the ocean. Towards the last I was delirious most of the time; and there were
times, too, when I heard Otoo babbling and raving in his native tongue. Our continuous immersion
prevented us from dying of thirst, though the sea water and the sunshine gave us the prettiest
imaginable combination of salt pickle and sunburn.

In the end, Otoo saved my life; for I came to lying on the beach twenty feet from the water,
sheltered from the sun by a couple of cocoanut leaves. No one but Otoo could have dragged me
there and stuck up the leaves for shade. He was lying beside me. I went off again; and the
next time I came round, it was cool and starry night, and Otoo was pressing a drinking cocoanut
to my lips.

We were the sole survivors of the Petite Jeanne. Captain Oudouse must have succumbed to exhaustion,
for several days later his hatch cover drifted ashore without him. Otoo and I lived with the
natives of the atoll for a week, when we were rescued by the French cruiser and taken to Tahiti.
In the meantime, however, we had performed the ceremony of exchanging names. In the South Seas
such a ceremony binds two men closer together than blood brothership. The initiative had been
mine; and Otoo was rapturously delighted when I suggested it.

"It is well," he said, in Tahitian. "For we have been mates together for two days on the lips
of Death."

"But death stuttered," I smiled.

"It was a brave deed you did, master," he replied, "and Death was not vile enough to speak."

"Why do you 'master' me?" I demanded, with a show of hurt feelings. "We have exchanged names.
To you I am Otoo. To me you are Charley. And between you and me, forever and forever, you shall
be Charley, and I shall be Otoo. It is the way of the custom. And when we die, if it does happen
that we live again somewhere beyond the stars and the sky, still shall you be Charley to me,
and I Otoo to you."

"Yes, master," he answered, his eyes luminous and soft with joy.

"There you go!" I cried indignantly.

"What does it matter what my lips utter?" he argued. "They are only my lips. But I shall think
Otoo always. Whenever I think of myself, I shall think of you. Whenever men call me by name,
I shall think of you. And beyond the sky and beyond the stars, always and forever, you shall
be Otoo to me. Is it well, master?"

I hid my smile, and answered that it was well.

We parted at Papeete. I remained ashore to recuperate; and he went on in a cutter to his own
island, Bora Bora. Six weeks later he was back. I was surprised, for he had told me of his
wife, and said that he was returning to her, and would give over sailing on far voyages.

"Where do you go, master?" he asked, after our first greetings.

I shrugged my shoulders. It was a hard question.

"All the world," was my answer--"all the world, all the sea, and all the islands that are in
the sea."

"I will go with you," he said simply. "My wife is dead."

I never had a brother; but from what I have seen of other men's brothers, I doubt if any man
ever had a brother that was to him what Otoo was to me. He was brother and father and mother
as well. And this I know: I lived a straighter and better man because of Otoo. I cared little
for other men, but I had to live straight in Otoo's eyes. Because of him I dared not tarnish
myself. He made me his ideal, compounding me, I fear, chiefly out of his own love and worship
and there were times when I stood close to the steep pitch of hell, and would have taken the
plunge had not the thought of Otoo restrained me. His pride in me entered into me, until it
became one of the major rules in my personal code to do nothing that would diminish that pride
of his.

Naturally, I did not learn right away what his feelings were toward me. He never criticized,
never censured; and slowly the exalted place I held in his eyes dawned upon me, and slowly
I grew to comprehend the hurt I could inflict upon him by being anything less than my best.

For seventeen years we were together; for seventeen years he was at my shoulder, watching while
I slept, nursing me through fever and wounds--ay, and receiving wounds in fighting for me.
He signed on the same ships with me; and together we ranged the Pacific from Hawaii to Sydney
Head, and from Torres Straits to the Galapagos. We blackbirded from the New Hebrides and the
Line Islands over to the westward clear through the Louisades, New Britain, New Ireland, and
New Hanover. We were wrecked three times--in the Gilberts, in the Santa Cruz group, and in
the Fijis. And we traded and salved wherever a dollar promised in the way of pearl and pearl
shell, copra, beche-de-mer, hawkbill turtle shell, and stranded wrecks.

It began in Papeete, immediately after his announcement that he was going with me over all
the sea, and the islands in the midst thereof. There was a club in those days in Papeete, where
the pearlers, traders, captains, and riffraff of South Sea adventurers forgathered. The play
ran high, and the drink ran high; and I am very much afraid that I kept later hours than were
becoming or proper. No matter what the hour was when I left the club, there was Otoo waiting
to see me safely home.

At first I smiled; next I chided him. Then I told him flatly that I stood in need of no wet-nursing.
After that I did not see him when I came out of the club. Quite by accident, a week or so later,
I discovered that he still saw me home, lurking across the street among the shadows of the
mango trees. What could I do? I know what I did do.

Insensibly I began to keep better hours. On wet and stormy nights, in the thick of the folly
and the fun, the thought would persist in coming to me of Otoo keeping his dreary vigil under
the dripping mangoes. Truly, he made a better man of me. Yet he was not strait-laced. And he
knew nothing of common Christian morality. All the people on Bora Bora were Christians; but
he was a heathen, the only unbeliever on the island, a gross materialist, who believed that
when he died he was dead. He believed merely in fair play and square dealing. Petty meanness,
in his code, was almost as serious as wanton homicide; and I do believe that he respected a
murderer more than a man given to small practices.

Concerning me, personally, he objected to my doing anything that was hurtful to me. Gambling
was all right. He was an ardent gambler himself. But late hours, he explained, were bad for
one's health. He had seen men who did not take care of themselves die of fever. He was no teetotaler,
and welcomed a stiff nip any time when it was wet work in the boats. On the other hand, he
believed in liquor in moderation. He had seen many men killed or disgraced by square-face or
Scotch.

Otoo had my welfare always at heart. He thought ahead for me, weighed my plans, and took a
greater interest in them than I did myself. At first, when I was unaware of this interest of
his in my affairs, he had to divine my intentions, as, for instance, at Papeete, when I contemplated
going partners with a knavish fellow-countryman on a guano venture. I did not know he was a
knave. Nor did any white man in Papeete. Neither did Otoo know, but he saw how thick we were
getting, and found out for me, and without my asking him. Native sailors from the ends of the
seas knock about on the beach in Tahiti; and Otoo, suspicious merely, went among them till
he had gathered sufficient data to justify his suspicions. Oh, it was a nice history, that
of Randolph Waters. I couldn't believe it when Otoo first narrated it; but when I sheeted it
home to Waters he gave in without a murmur, and got away on the first steamer to Aukland.

At first, I am free to confess, I couldn't help resenting Otoo's poking his nose into my business.
But I knew that he was wholly unselfish; and soon I had to acknowledge his wisdom and discretion.
He had his eyes open always to my main chance, and he was both keen-sighted and far-sighted.
In time he became my counselor, until he knew more of my business than I did myself. He really
had my interest at heart more than I did. Mine was the magnificent carelessness of youth, for
I preferred romance to dollars, and adventure to a comfortable billet with all night in. So
it was well that I had some one to look out for me. I know that if it had not been for Otoo,
I should not be here today.

Of numerous instances, let me give one. I had had some experience in blackbirding before I
went pearling in the Paumotus. Otoo and I were on the beach in Samoa--we really were on the
beach and hard aground--when my chance came to go as recruiter on a blackbird brig. Otoo signed
on before the mast; and for the next half-dozen years, in as many ships, we knocked about the
wildest portions of Melanesia. Otoo saw to it that he always pulled stroke-oar in my boat.
Our custom in recruiting labor was to land the recruiter on the beach. The covering boat always
lay on its oars several hundred feet off shore, while the recruiter's boat, also lying on its
oars, kept afloat on the edge of the beach. When I landed with my trade goods, leaving my steering
sweep apeak, Otoo left his stroke position and came into the stern sheets, where a Winchester
lay ready to hand under a flap of canvas. The boat's crew was also armed, the Sniders concealed
under canvas flaps that ran the length of the gunwales.

While I was busy arguing and persuading the woolly-headed cannibals to come and labor on the
Queensland plantations Otoo kept watch. And often and often his low voice warned me of suspicious
actions and impending treachery. Sometimes it was the quick shot from his rifle, knocking a
nigger over, that was the first warning I received. And in my rush to the boat his hand was
always there to jerk me flying aboard. Once, I remember, on SANTA ANNA, the boat grounded just
as the trouble began. The covering boat was dashing to our assistance, but the several score
of savages would have wiped us out before it arrived. Otoo took a flying leap ashore, dug both
hands into the trade goods, and scattered tobacco, beads, tomahawks, knives, and calicoes in
all directions.

This was too much for the woolly-heads. While they scrambled for the treasures, the boat was
shoved clear, and we were aboard and forty feet away. And I got thirty recruits off that very
beach in the next four hours.

The particular instance I have in mind was on Malaita, the most savage island in the easterly
Solomons. The natives had been remarkably friendly; and how were we to know that the whole
village had been taking up a collection for over two years with which to buy a white man's
head? The beggars are all head-hunters, and they especially esteem a white man's head. The
fellow who captured the head would receive the whole collection. As I say, they appeared very
friendly; and on this day I was fully a hundred yards down the beach from the boat. Otoo had
cautioned me; and, as usual when I did not heed him, I came to grief.

The first I knew, a cloud of spears sailed out of the mangrove swamp at me. At least a dozen
were sticking into me. I started to run, but tripped over one that was fast in my calf, and
went down. The woolly-heads made a run for me, each with a long-handled, fantail tomahawk with
which to hack off my head. They were so eager for the prize that they got in one another's
way. In the confusion, I avoided several hacks by throwing myself right and left on the sand.

Then Otoo arrived--Otoo the manhandler. In some way he had got hold of a heavy war club, and
at close quarters it was a far more efficient weapon than a rifle. He was right in the thick
of them, so that they could not spear him, while their tomahawks seemed worse than useless.
He was fighting for me, and he was in a true Berserker rage. The way he handled that club was
amazing.

Their skulls squashed like overripe oranges. It was not until he had driven them back, picked
me up in his arms, and started to run, that he received his first wounds. He arrived in the
boat with four spear thrusts, got his Winchester, and with it got a man for every shot. Then
we pulled aboard the schooner, and doctored up.

Seventeen years we were together. He made me. I should today be a supercargo, a recruiter,
or a memory, if it had not been for him.

"You spend your money, and you go out and get more," he said one day. "It is easy to get money
now. But when you get old, your money will be spent, and you will not be able to go out and
get more. I know, master. I have studied the way of white men. On the beaches are many old
men who were young once, and who could get money just like you. Now they are old, and they
have nothing, and they wait about for the young men like you to come ashore and buy drinks
for them.

"The black boy is a slave on the plantations. He gets twenty dollars a year. He works hard.
The overseer does not work hard. He rides a horse and watches the black boy work. He gets twelve
hundred dollars a year. I am a sailor on the schooner. I get fifteen dollars a month. That
is because I am a good sailor. I work hard. The captain has a double awning, and drinks beer
out of long bottles. I have never seen him haul a rope or pull an oar. He gets one hundred
and fifty dollars a month. I am a sailor. He is a navigator. Master, I think it would be very
good for you to know navigation."

Otoo spurred me on to it. He sailed with me as second mate on my first schooner, and he was
far prouder of my command than I was myself. Later on it was:

"The captain is well paid, master; but the ship is in his keeping, and he is never free from
the burden. It is the owner who is better paid--the owner who sits ashore with many servants
and turns his money over."

"True, but a schooner costs five thousand dollars--an old schooner at that," I objected. "I
should be an old man before I saved five thousand dollars."

"There be short ways for white men to make money," he went on, pointing ashore at the cocoanut-fringed
beach.

We were in the Solomons at the time, picking up a cargo of ivory nuts along the east coast
of Guadalcanar.

"Between this river mouth and the next it is two miles," he said.

"The flat land runs far back. It is worth nothing now. Next year--who knows?--or the year after,
men will pay much money for that land. The anchorage is good. Big steamers can lie close up.
You can buy the land four miles deep from the old chief for ten thousand sticks of tobacco,
ten bottles of square-face, and a Snider, which will cost you, maybe, one hundred dollars.
Then you place the deed with the commissioner; and the next year, or the year after, you sell
and become the owner of a ship."

I followed his lead, and his words came true, though in three years, instead of two. Next came
the grasslands deal on Guadalcanar--twenty thousand acres, on a governmental nine hundred and
ninety-nine years' lease at a nominal sum. I owned the lease for precisely ninety days, when
I sold it to a company for half a fortune. Always it was Otoo who looked ahead and saw the
opportunity. He was responsible for the salving of the Doncaster--bought in at auction for
a hundred pounds, and clearing three thousand after every expense was paid. He led me into
the Savaii plantation and the cocoa venture on Upolu.

We did not go seafaring so much as in the old days. I was too well off. I married, and my standard
of living rose; but Otoo remained the same old-time Otoo, moving about the house or trailing
through the office, his wooden pipe in his mouth, a shilling undershirt on his back, and a
four-shilling lava-lava about his loins. I could not get him to spend money. There was no way
of repaying him except with love, and God knows he got that in full measure from all of us.
The children worshipped him; and if he had been spoilable, my wife would surely have been his
undoing.

The children! He really was the one who showed them the way of their feet in the world practical.
He began by teaching them to walk. He sat up with them when they were sick. One by one, when
they were scarcely toddlers, he took them down to the lagoon, and made them into amphibians.
He taught them more than I ever knew of the habits of fish and the ways of catching them. In
the bush it was the same thing. At seven, Tom knew more woodcraft than I ever dreamed existed.
At six, Mary went over the Sliding Rock without a quiver, and I have seen strong men balk at
that feat. And when Frank had just turned six he could bring up shillings from the bottom in
three fathoms.

"My people in Bora Bora do not like heathen--they are all Christians; and I do not like Bora
Bora Christians," he said one day, when I, with the idea of getting him to spend some of the
money that was rightfully his, had been trying to persuade him to make a visit to his own island
in one of our schooners--a special voyage which I had hoped to make a record breaker in the
matter of prodigal expense.

I say one of OUR schooners, though legally at the time they belonged to me. I struggled long
with him to enter into partnership.

"We have been partners from the day the Petite Jeanne went down," he said at last. "But if
your heart so wishes, then shall we become partners by the law. I have no work to do, yet are
my expenses large. I drink and eat and smoke in plenty--it costs much, I know. I do not pay
for the playing of billiards, for I play on your table; but still the money goes. Fishing on
the reef is only a rich man's pleasure. It is shocking, the cost of hooks and cotton line.
Yes; it is necessary that we be partners by the law. I need the money. I shall get it from
the head clerk in the office."

So the papers were made out and recorded. A year later I was compelled to complain.

"Charley," said I, "you are a wicked old fraud, a miserly skinflint, a miserable land crab.
Behold, your share for the year in all our partnership has been thousands of dollars. The head
clerk has given me this paper. It says that in the year you have drawn just eighty-seven dollars
and twenty cents."

"Is there any owing me?" he asked anxiously.

"I tell you thousands and thousands," I answered.

His face brightened, as with an immense relief.

"It is well," he said. "See that the head clerk keeps good account of it. When I want it, I
shall want it, and there must not be a cent missing.

"If there is," he added fiercely, after a pause, "it must come out of the clerk's wages."

And all the time, as I afterwards learned, his will, drawn up by Carruthers, and making me
sole beneficiary, lay in the American consul's safe.

But the end came, as the end must come to all human associations.

It occurred in the Solomons, where our wildest work had been done in the wild young days, and
where we were once more--principally on a holiday, incidentally to look after our holdings
on Florida Island and to look over the pearling possibilities of the Mboli Pass. We were lying
at Savo, having run in to trade for curios.

Now, Savo is alive with sharks. The custom of the woolly-heads of burying their dead in the
sea did not tend to discourage the sharks from making the adjacent waters a hangout. It was
my luck to be coming aboard in a tiny, overloaded, native canoe, when the thing capsized. There
were four woolly-heads and myself in it, or rather, hanging to it. The schooner was a hundred
yards away.

I was just hailing for a boat when one of the woolly-heads began to scream. Holding on to the
end of the canoe, both he and that portion of the canoe were dragged under several times. Then
he loosed his clutch and disappeared. A shark had got him.

The three remaining niggers tried to climb out of the water upon the bottom of the canoe. I
yelled and cursed and struck at the nearest with my fist, but it was no use. They were in a
blind funk. The canoe could barely have supported one of them. Under the three it upended and
rolled sidewise, throwing them back into the water.

I abandoned the canoe and started to swim toward the schooner, expecting to be picked up by
the boat before I got there. One of the niggers elected to come with me, and we swam along
silently, side by side, now and again putting our faces into the water and peering about for
sharks. The screams of the man who stayed by the canoe informed us that he was taken. I was
peering into the water when I saw a big shark pass directly beneath me. He was fully sixteen
feet in length. I saw the whole thing. He got the woolly-head by the middle, and away he went,
the poor devil, head, shoulders, and arms out of the water all the time, screeching in a heart-rending
way. He was carried along in this fashion for several hundred feet, when he was dragged beneath
the surface.

I swam doggedly on, hoping that that was the last unattached shark. But there was another.
Whether it was one that had attacked the natives earlier, or whether it was one that had made
a good meal elsewhere, I do not know. At any rate, he was not in such haste as the others.
I could not swim so rapidly now, for a large part of my effort was devoted to keeping track
of him. I was watching him when he made his first attack. By good luck I got both hands on
his nose, and, though his momentum nearly shoved me under, I managed to keep him off. He veered
clear, and began circling about again. A second time I escaped him by the same manoeuvre. The
third rush was a miss on both sides. He sheered at the moment my hands should have landed on
his nose, but his sandpaper hide (I had on a sleeveless undershirt) scraped the skin off one
arm from elbow to shoulder.

By this time I was played out, and gave up hope. The schooner was still two hundred feet away.
My face was in the water, and I was watching him manoeuvre for another attempt, when I saw
a brown body pass between us. It was Otoo.

"Swim for the schooner, master!" he said. And he spoke gayly, as though the affair was a mere
lark. "I know sharks. The shark is my brother."

I obeyed, swimming slowly on, while Otoo swam about me, keeping always between me and the shark,
foiling his rushes and encouraging me.

"The davit tackle carried away, and they are rigging the falls," he explained, a minute or
so later, and then went under to head off another attack.

By the time the schooner was thirty feet away I was about done for. I could scarcely move.
They were heaving lines at us from on board, but they continually fell short. The shark, finding
that it was receiving no hurt, had become bolder. Several times it nearly got me, but each
time Otoo was there just the moment before it was too late. Of course, Otoo could have saved
himself any time. But he stuck by me.

"Good-by, Charley! I'm finished!" I just managed to gasp.

I knew that the end had come, and that the next moment I should throw up my hands and go down.

But Otoo laughed in my face, saying:

"I will show you a new trick. I will make that shark feel sick!"

He dropped in behind me, where the shark was preparing to come at me.

"A little more to the left!" he next called out. "There is a line there on the water. To the
left, master--to the left!"

I changed my course and struck out blindly. I was by that time barely conscious. As my hand
closed on the line I heard an exclamation from on board. I turned and looked. There was no
sign of Otoo. The next instant he broke surface. Both hands were off at the wrist, the stumps
spouting blood.

"Otoo!" he called softly. And I could see in his gaze the love that thrilled in his voice.

Then, and then only, at the very last of all our years, he called me by that name.

"Good-by, Otoo!" he called.

Then he was dragged under, and I was hauled aboard, where I fainted in the captain's arms.

And so passed Otoo, who saved me and made me a man, and who saved me in the end. We met in
the maw of a hurricane, and parted in the maw of a shark, with seventeen intervening years
of comradeship, the like of which I dare to assert has never befallen two men, the one brown
and the other white. If Jehovah be from His high place watching every sparrow fall, not least
in His kingdom shall be Otoo, the one heathen of Bora Bora. 

Chevroneé, Chevrony.

A field composed of a number of pieces divided and disposed per Chevron: No. 124A.

Chief. One of the Ordinaries: Nos. 71-75.

In Chief--placed in the upper part of the shield, or arranged in a horizontal row across the
upper part of the field.

Cinque-foil. A flower or leaf of five foils: No. 227.

Civic Crown. A wreath of oak-leaves and acorns.

Clarenceux. See Herald.

Clarion. An ancient musical instrument, a badge, apparently, of the DE CLARES. By some this charge
is supposed to represent a lance-rest, and is sometimes so blazoned:
No. 228, which shows two varieties of form.

Clecheé. A variety of the heraldic Cross: No. 105.

Close. With closed wings.

Closet. A Diminutive of the Bar, one half its width.

Cloueé. Fastened with Nails, and showing the Nail-heads: No. 150.

Coat Armour. True armorial or heraldic bearings, duly granted or inherited, and rightly borne:
so entitled, from having been depicted by warriors of the Middle
Ages upon their surcoats, worn by them over their armour.

Coat of Arms. A complete armorial composition, properly what would be charged upon a Shield or
Banner, but often used as an alternative for Achievement, q.v.

Cockatrice. A fabulous creature, represented in No. 229.

Collar. One of the insignia of Orders of Knighthood, worn about the
neck.

Also any ornament or distinction worn in the same manner. Knights occasionally wore collars
charged with their own badge. In addition to their badges of the Red and White Rose, examples
exist showing that adherents of the rival houses of York and Lancaster sometimes wore collars,
the former formed of alternate Suns and Roses, No. 230; and the latter, of the letter S continually
repeated, No. 231. No certain origin has been discovered for the Lancastrian “Collar of S.,”
but it has been suggested that it represents the word SOVERAYGNE, the motto of HENRY IV. No. 230 is
from the Brass to HENRY BOURCHIER, K.G., Earl of Essex, at Little Easton, Suffolk, A.D. 1483;
and No. 231 from the Brass to Lord CAMOYS, K.G., at Trotton, Sussex, A.D. 1424.

College of Arms, or Heralds’ College.

(See Herald.)

Colour. See Chapter V., page 41. The term “Colours” is applied to Flags, particularly to those
of infantry regiments, and to such as are displayed at sea. (See Chapter XVII.)

Combatant. Two lions, or other animals of prey, rampant and face to face.

Compartment. In Scottish Heraldry, “a kind of carved panel, of no fixed form, placed below the
escutcheon, bearing the supporters, and usually inscribed with a
motto or the name and designation of the owner.” --Seton.

Other objects placed below the shield are met with under this description.

Componée, Compony, or Gobony.

A single row of small squares alternately of two tinctures or furs: No. 66. (See Counter Componée.)

Complement,
In her.

Applied to the moon when full.

Compound Quartering. The quartering of a quarter, or division of a quartered Coat-of-Arms. (See
page 34.)

Compound Arms.

Arms formed from the combination of the bearings of two or more distinct
coats, to produce a single compound coat.

Conjoined in Lure. Two wings united, their tips in base.

Contoise. A flowing scarf, worn attached to the helm before 1350.

Two examples occur in effigies in Exeter Cathedral, and another in
Westminster Abbey.

Contournée. Facing to the sinister.

Cornish Chough.

A bird like a crow, black, with red beak and legs.

Coronet. An ensign of rank worn upon the head, in use in England from about the middle of the
fourteenth century, but without any distinctive tokens of gradations of rank until a later period.
In modern times English Coronets have enclosed a velvet cap with a bullion tassel. This cap originated
in the cap of estate worn by Peers. (See Prince, Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, and Baron.)

Cotise.
A diminutive of the Bend or other Ordinary, being one-fourth of their width. Cotised. When a
Bend or Chevron is placed between two Cotises, or when a Fesse or Bar is placed between two Barrulets.
Nos. 114, 115.

Couchant. In repose. No. 177.

Couchée. Said of a Shield when suspended from the sinister extremity
of the chief, or when placed as if it were so suspended.

No. 49.

Count, Countess. Count, in Latin “Comes,” the same as Earl. Countess, the wife of an Earl: she
is “Right Honourable,” and styled “My Lady”: her coronet is the same
as that of an Earl.

Counter. Reversed or opposite.

Counter-changing. See page 44, and Nos. 70, 126.

Counter Componée. Double Componée, or two conjoined rows of alternately tinctured squares. No. 67.

Counter-Embattled.
A term in use for a fesse, bar, or chevron when embattled on both edges.

Counter-seal. Early seals were generally impressed on both sides; and the seals thus were produced
from two dies or matrices. The two sides were severally called the seal and the counter-seal,
the latter being termed the reverse of the compound composition. Every such double impression
constituted a single seal. Both seal and counter-seal were sometimes used alone; and the counter-seal
was regarded as a private seal, or secretum.

Couped. Cut off smoothly--the reverse of “erased.”

Couple-close. Half a chevronel.

Courant. Running.

Courtesy, Titles of.

Nominal degrees of rank, conceded to, and borne by, the Eldest Sons of Dukes, Marquesses, and
Earls, and other titles used by their younger children and all children
of Viscounts and Barons.

Coward, Cowed. A term applied to an animal with its tail between its legs. No. 182.

Crampet. The decorated end of a sword-scabbard.

Crancelin.

From the German kranzlein, “a small garland,” applied to the chaplet
that crosses the shield of Saxony, No. 225: this charge is also blazoned
as a bend treflée vert, a bend archée coronettée, or a coronet extended
in bend: it is said to be an augmentation conferred, with the Dukedom
of Saxony, on BERNHARD of Ascania, by the Emperor BARBAROSSA.

The Emperor took from his head his own chaplet of rue, and threw it across the shield of Duke
Bernhard.

This story is probably untrue.

Crenellated. Embattled.

Crescent. No. 166. In modern English cadency, the difference of the
second son, or house.

Cresset. A beacon.

Crest. A figure or device originally worn upon a helm, and now generally represented above a
Shield of arms. Crests at first were ensigns of high honour, and their use was restricted to
a few persons of eminence: they were attached by a wreath, or torse,
or by a coronet, to the helm or basinet; and sometimes a crest stood
upon a cap of estate.

Crests are still represented standing upon either a wreath, or a
cap, or issuing from a coronet: but in our own Heraldry a crest-coronet
must always be carefully distinguished from those coronets that are
insignia of princely and noble rank.

Crests are not borne by ladies, a reigning Sovereign only excepted.

(See Panache, Rebus, and Chapter XIV.)

Crest-Coronet.

A coronet from which issues, or which supports, a crest. No. 232.

Crest-Wreath, or Torse.

In the Middle Ages, of rich materials and costly workmanship; now
represented as being formed of two rolls of silk of the principal
metal and colour in the arms, which are twisted to show the metal
and colour alternately.

The earliest examples are about A.D. 1375.

No. 233 shows three varieties of representation.

(See Chapter XIV.)

Crined. Having a mane or hair.

Cross. One of the Ordinaries. Nos. 90-110.

Crown. The ensign of Royal and Imperial dignity; in Heraldry borne as a charge, and also used to denote
the rank of a Sovereign Prince. The Crown that is generally borne as a charge is represented
without arches, and resembling No. 232. Certain other crowns, each distinguished by an appropriate
title, are also sometimes borne on shields, or introduced as heraldic accessories. (See Celestial,
Eastern or Radiated, Mural, Naval, and Vallary Crowns.) The different forms assumed at different
periods by the Royal Crown of England are faithfully exemplified in the seals and the coinage
of the successive Sovereigns, and several fine examples are preserved in the Royal effigies. The adornment
of the regal circlet was arbitrary before the fifteenth century; still, it always was enriched
with gems and surmounted by golden foliage. HENRY V. first arched his crown; and by HENRY VI.
the circlet was first heightened with alternate crosses-patée and fleurs de lys. This arrangement
has since been retained, the subsequent alterations being restricted to changes in the number
and in the contour of the arches.

The crown of His Majesty the KING has the circlet heightened with
four crosses and as many fleurs de lys; from the crosses rise the
arches, which are surmounted by a mound and a cross-patée.

No. 234. This, the heraldic crown, is not an exact reproduction of
the actual crown of the King.

Crozier. Strictly, the cross-staff of an archbishop; distinguished by its form from the pastoral-staff
with a crook-head, of bishops; but the term is loosely and very generally
applied also to the crook-headed pastoral-staff.

Crusilee, Crusily. Having the field semée of crosses-crosslets, or of other small crosses, their
peculiar form (when not crosslets) being specified.

Cubit arm.

A human arm couped between the elbow and the wrist.

Cup, Covered Cup.

A vessel formed like a chalice, and having a raised cover; borne by the BOTILERS, BUTLERS, &c.

Cushion,
Pillow, Oreiller. Unless described of another form, square or oblong, and with a tassel at
each corner.

Dacre Knot. No. 235. (See Knot.)

Dancetté. No. 38B. In early blazon, a fesse dancetté is styled simply “a dancette” or “a danse.”
Nos. 78, 146; and No. 20A, page 70.

Debruised. When an ordinary surmounts an animal or another charge.

Decrescent. A half-moon having its horns to the sinister.

No. 166C.

Deer.

In general practice very little if any differentiation is made between
the Stag, the Buck, and the Hart; the female is a Hind, and of course
is without attires.

(See Chapter VIII.)

Degrees. A term applied to the steps upon which a Cross Calvary is represented.

Demembered, Dismembered. Cut into pieces, but without any alteration in the form of the original
figure.

Demi. The half. The upper, front, or dexter half, unless the contrary be specified. No. 186.

Depressed. Surmounted.

Dexter. The right side. No. 27C.

Diaper, Diapering. Surface decoration. No. 68.

Difference, Differencing. An addition to, or some change in, a Coat-of-Arms, introduced for
the purpose of distinguishing Coats which in their primary qualities
are the same.

(See Chapters XII. and XIII.)

Dimidiated. Cut in halves per pale, and one half removed: No. 250. (See Chapter XI.)

Disclosed. With expanded wings, in the case of birds that are not birds of prey. The contrary
to Close.

Displayed. Birds of prey with expanded wings. No. 200.

Disposed, Disposition. Arranged, arrangement.

Dividing Lines. No. 38: also Nos. 27-37.

Dolphin. A favourite fish with Heralds. The heraldic Dolphin of antiquity is exemplified in No.
8; that of the Middle Ages in No. 163.

Dormant. Asleep, as in No. 179.

Double-queued. Having two tails. No. 181.

Doubling. The lining of a Mantle or Mantling.

Dove-tail. No. 381.

Dragon. A winged monster having four legs. No. 236.

Duke. The highest rank and title in the British Peerage; first introduced by EDWARD III. in
the year 1337, when he created the BLACK PRINCE the first English Duke (in Latin, “Dux”). A Duke
is “Most Noble”; he is styled “My Lord Duke,” and “Your Grace”; and all his younger sons are
“Lords,” and all his daughters “Ladies,” with the prefix “Right Honourable.” His eldest son bears,
by courtesy, his father’s “second title”; and, accordingly, he generally bears the title of Marquess.
Whatever his title, however, the rank of the eldest son of a Duke
is always the same, and it assigns to him precedence between Marquesses
and Earls.

The Coronet of a Duke, arbitrary in its adornment until the sixteenth century was far advanced,
is now a circlet, heightened with eight conventional strawberry-leaves, of which in representations
three and two half-leaves are shown; No. 237. It encloses a velvet
cap.

The present ducal coronet is represented in the portrait of LUDOVICK
STUART, K.G., Duke of RICHMOND and LENNOX, who died in 1624; the picture,
the property of the Crown, is at Hampton Court.

Ducal Coronet. A term commonly, but not very accurately, applied to a Crest Coronet. No. 232.

Duchess. The wife of a Duke. She is “Most Noble,” and is styled “Your Grace.” Her coronet is the
same as that of a Duke.

Eagle. See Chapter IX., page 92.

Eaglet. An Eagle on a small scale.

Earl. In Latin, “Comes”; in French,
“Comte” or “Count.” Before 1337, the highest, and now the third degree
of rank and dignity in the British Peerage. An Earl is “Right Honourable”;
he is styled “My Lord”; his eldest son bears his father’s “second
title,” generally that of Viscount; his other sons are styled “Honourable,”
but all his daughters are “Ladies.” The circlet of an Earl’s Coronet
has eight lofty rays of gold rising from the circlet, each of which
supports a large pearl, while between each pair of these rays there
is a golden strawberry-leaf. In representations five of the rays and
pearls are shown; No. 238. Elevated clusters of pearls appear in an
Earl’s coronet--that of THOMAS FITZ ALAN, Earl of ARUNDEL--as early
as 1445; but the present form of the coronet may be assigned to the
second half of the following century.

Eastern, Radiated, or Antique
Crown. No. 239.

Electoral Bonnet. A cap of crimson velvet guarded
with ermine, borne, in the Royal Arms, over the inescutcheon of the
arms of Hanover from 1801 till 1816. No. 240.

Embattled, and Counter-Embattled.
A term applied to a fess or bar when so depicted both above and below.

Embowed.
Bent. An arm embowed has the elbow to the dexter, unless blazoned
to the contrary.

Embrued. Stained with blood.

Endorse. A diminutive
of the pale.

Enfiled. Pierced, e.g. with a sword, or surrounded,
e.g. with a coronet.

Engrailed. The border-line, No. 38D.

Enhanced.
Raised towards the chief. Thus the arms of BYRON, No. 241, are--Arg.,
three bendlets enhanced gu.

Ensigned. Adorned; having some ensign
of honour placed above--as a coronet above a shield.

Entire. Said
of a charge when it is necessary to express that it extends to the
border lines of a shield, coat, or banner; also of a shield, coat,
or banner of arms, when borne without any difference or mark of cadency.

Entoire,
Entoyre. A bordure charged with a series of inanimate figures or devices,
as crosslets, roundles, &c.; to a similar bordure of living figures
the term Enaluron is applied. These are not terms ordinarily in use.

Enveloped,
Environed. Surrounded.

Equipped. Fully armed, caparisoned, or provided.

Eradicated.
Torn up by the roots.

Erased. Torn off with a ragged edge; the contrary
to Couped.

Ermine, Ermines, Erminois. Nos. 57-60 and 57A. The animal,
the ermine, sometimes appears in blazon, and an ermine spot is borne
as a charge.

Erne. An eagle. (See p. 96.)

Escarbuncle. No. 19.

Escroll.
A ribbon charged with a motto; also a ribbon, coiled at its extremities,
borne as a charge.

Escutcheon. An heraldic shield: Nos. 39-40: also
No. 27. An Escutcheon, when borne as a charge, is usually blazoned
as an “Inescutcheon”: thus, the Arms of HAY are,--Arg., three inescutcheons
gu.: see also Nos. 131, 133.

Escutcheon of Pretence. A shield charged
upon the centre of the field of another shield of larger size, and
bearing a distinct Coat-of-Arms.

Escallop, or Escallop-Shell. A beautiful
and favourite charge; No. 165.

Esquire. A rank below that of Knight.
Besides those Esquires who are personal attendants of Knights of Orders
of Knighthood at their installations, this title is held by most attendants
on the person of the Sovereign, and all persons holding or having
held the Sovereign’s commission in which they are so styled.

Estate.
Dignity and rank.

Estoile. A star with wavy rays or points, which
are six, eight, or sometimes even more in number: No. 242. (See Mullet.)

False.
Said of any charge when its central area is removed--thus, an Annulet
is a “false roundle.”

Fan, or Winnowing Fan, or Vane. The well-known
implement of husbandry of that name, borne by the Kentish Family of
De Sevans or Septvans--Az., three fans or (E. 2). This shield appears
in the Brass to Sir R. DE SEVANS, A.D. 1305, at Chartham, in Kent,
and in the cloisters at Canterbury.

Fan Crest. An early form of decoration
for the knightly helm, exemplified in the 2nd Great Seal of RICHARD I.,
and in many other Seals, until about A.D. 1350. (See Chapter XIV.)

Feathers.
Generally those of the Ostrich, sometimes of the swan, the turkey,
and a few other birds, borne generally as Crests and Badges, both
singly and in plumes or groups. (See Ostrich Feather, Panache, and
Chapter XIV.)

Femme. The Wife, as distinguished from the “Baron,”
the Husband.

Fer-de-Moline, or Mill-rind. The iron affixed to the
centre of a mill-stone; No. 243: a modification of the Cross-moline;
No. 97.

Fermail (plural Fermaux). A buckle: No. 244. Several varieties
of form appear in blazon, it being usual to specify them as round,
oval, square, or lozenge-shaped. They are always blazoned as buckles.

Fess,
or Fesse. One of the Ordinaries: Nos. 76-80. Fesse-wise, In Fesse.
Disposed in a horizontal line, side by side, across the centre of
the field, and over the Fesse-Point of a shield: No. 27, M.

Fetter-lock.
A shackle and padlock--a Yorkist Badge: No. 245; is from the Brass
to Sir S. DE FELBRIGGE, K.G., at Felbrigg, Norfolk, A.D. 1414; this,
however, being a very unusual shape.

Field. The entire surface of
a Shield or Banner, or of an Ordinary.

File. A Label, from the Latin
filum, a narrow ribbon.

Fillet. A diminutive of a Chief.

Fimbriated.
Bordered--the border (which is narrow) lying in the same plane with
the object bordered: No. 89.

Fish. Numerous Fish appear in blazon,
and generally in their proper tinctures. They are borne as allusive
charges, and also as types of some connection between those persons
who bear them and the sea or lakes or rivers. Mr. Moule has published
an admirable volume on the “Heraldry of Fish,” beautifully illustrated
with examples drawn by his daughter. (See p. 77.)

Fitchée. Pointed
at the base, as in No. 110.

Flanches, Flasques. Subordinaries: Nos.
141, 142.

Fleur de lys. The beautiful heraldic device so long identified
with the history of France: No. 246 (from the monument of EDWARD III.?).
The fleur de lys, derived, it would seem, from the flower of a lily
resembling the iris, was adopted by LOUIS VII. (A.D. 1137-1180) as
his royal ensign, and in due time it was regularly charged upon a
true Shield of Arms. Originally the Royal Shield of France was--Az.,
semée of fleurs de lys, or; the fleurs de lys scattered freely over
the field, and the Shield itself having the appearance of having been
cut out of a larger object, over the whole surface of which the flowers
had been semée. This Shield of France is distinguished as “France
Ancient”: No. 247. About A.D. 1365, CHARLES V. of France reduced the
number of the fleurs de lys to three; and this Shield is now known
as “France Modern”: No. 248. In the year 1275, EDMUND, first Earl
of Lancaster, the second son of HENRY III., married BLANCHE of Artois,
when he differenced his shield of England with a label of France--a
blue label charged on each point with three golden fleurs de lys.
No. 249, thus, for the first time did the armorial insignia of England
and France appear together upon the same Shield. In 1299 EDWARD I.
married his second Queen, MARGARET of France, and then this royal
lady placed on one of her Seals a Shield of England and France dimidiated:
No. 250. On another of her Seals, a very noble example of the Seal-engraver’s
art, Queen MARGARET displayed the Shield of King EDWARD I., her husband,
surrounded, on the field of the Seal, with her father’s fleurs de
lys: No. 251. On the Seals of ISABELLE of France, Queen of EDWARD II.,
the same dimidiated shield, and another shield quartering the arms
of England with France Ancient and two other French coats (Navarre
and Champagne) appear. Then Prince JOHN of ELTHAM charged a “bordure
of France” upon his shield, No. 24; thus applying the suggestion of
the Seal of Queen MARGARET, No. 251, in such a manner as was consistent
with the advanced condition of heraldic art. On his accession in 1327,
EDWARD III. placed a fleur de lys on each side of the Shield of England
upon his Great Seal: and in 1340, when he claimed the crown of France,
EDWARD quartered France Ancient with his lions of England: No. 252.
Shortly after his accession, perhaps in 1405, in order to conform
to the altered blazonry of the French sovereigns, HENRY IV. quartered
France Modern on his shield: No. 253. The position of the three fleurs
de lys was more than once changed in the Royal Shield of England (as
I shall hereafter show more particularly) after the accession of the
STUARTS; and they were not finally removed till the first year of
the nineteenth century. The fleur de lys is also borne on many English
Shields, disposed in various ways. In modern cadency the fleur de
lys is the difference of the sixth son, or house.

Fleurettée, Florettée.
 "The niggers killed the five
white men ashore, captured the schooner, killed the captain and mate, and escaped in a body
to Malaita. But I always said they were careless on Hohono. They won't catch us napping here.
Come along, Mr. Arkwright, and see our view from the veranda."

Bertie was too busy wondering how he could get away to Tulagi to the Commissioner's house,
to see much of the view. He was still wondering, when a rifle exploded very near to him, behind
his back. At the same moment his arm was nearly dislocated, so eagerly did Mr. Harriwell drag
him indoors.

"I say, old man, that was a close shave," said the manager, pawing him over to see if he had
been hit. "I can't tell you how sorry I am. But it was broad daylight, and I never dreamed."

Bertie was beginning to turn pale.

"They got the other manager that way," McTavish vouchsafed. "And a dashed fine chap he was.
Blew his brains out all over the veranda. You noticed that dark stain there between the steps
and the door?"

Bertie was ripe for the cocktail which Mr. Harriwell pitched in and compounded for him; but
before he could drink it, a man in riding trousers and puttees entered.

"What's the matter now?" the manager asked, after one look at the newcomer's face. "Is the
river up again?"

"River be blowed--it's the niggers. Stepped out of the cane grass, not a dozen feet away, and
whopped at me. It was a Snider, and he shot from the hip. Now what I want to know is where'd
he get that Snider?--Oh, I beg pardon. Glad to know you, Mr. Arkwright."

"Mr. Brown is my assistant," explained Mr. Harriwell. "And now let's have that drink."

"But where'd he get that Snider?" Mr. Brown insisted. "I always objected to keeping those guns
on the premises."

"They're still there," Mr. Harriwell said, with a show of heat.

Mr. Brown smiled incredulously.

"Come along and see," said the manager.

Bertie joined the procession into the office, where Mr. Harriwell pointed triumphantly at a
big packing case in a dusty corner.

"Well, then where did the beggar get that Snider?" harped Mr. Brown.

But just then McTavish lifted the packing case. The manager started, then tore off the lid.
The case was empty. They gazed at one another in horrified silence. Harriwell drooped wearily.

Then McVeigh cursed.

"What I contended all along--the house-boys are not to be trusted."

"It does look serious," Harriwell admitted, "but we'll come through it all right. What the
sanguinary niggers need is a shaking up. Will you gentlemen please bring your rifles to dinner,
and will you, Mr. Brown, kindly prepare forty or fifty sticks of dynamite. Make the fuses good
and short. We'll give them a lesson. And now, gentlemen, dinner is served."

One thing that Bertie detested was rice and curry, so it happened that he alone partook of
an inviting omelet. He had quite finished his plate, when Harriwell helped himself to the omelet.
One mouthful he tasted, then spat out vociferously.

"That's the second time," McTavish announced ominously.

Harriwell was still hawking and spitting.

"Second time, what?" Bertie quavered.

"Poison," was the answer. "That cook will be hanged yet."

"That's the way the bookkeeper went out at Cape March," Brown spoke up. "Died horribly. They
said on the Jessie that they heard him screaming three miles away."

"I'll put the cook in irons," sputtered Harriwell. "Fortunately we discovered it in time."

Bertie sat paralyzed. There was no color in his face. He attempted to speak, but only an inarticulate
gurgle resulted. All eyed him anxiously.

"Don't say it, don't say it," McTavish cried in a tense voice.

"Yes, I ate it, plenty of it, a whole plateful!" Bertie cried explosively, like a diver suddenly
regaining breath.

The awful silence continued half a minute longer, and he read his fate in their eyes.

"Maybe it wasn't poison after all," said Harriwell, dismally.

"Call in the cook," said Brown.

In came the cook, a grinning black boy, nose-spiked and ear-plugged.

"Here, you, Wi-wi, what name that?" Harriwell bellowed, pointing accusingly at the omelet.

Wi-wi was very naturally frightened and embarrassed.

"Him good fella kai-kai," he murmured apologetically.

"Make him eat it," suggested McTavish. "That's a proper test."

Harriwell filled a spoon with the stuff and jumped for the cook, who fled in panic.

"That settles it," was Brown's solemn pronouncement. "He won't eat it."

"Mr. Brown, will you please go and put the irons on him?" Harriwell turned cheerfully to Bertie.
"It's all right, old man, the Commissioner will deal with him, and if you die, depend upon
it, he will be hanged."

"Don't think the government'll do it," objected McTavish.

"But gentlemen, gentlemen," Bertie cried. "In the meantime think of me."

Harriwell shrugged his shoulders pityingly.

"Sorry, old man, but it's a native poison, and there are no known antidotes for native poisons.
Try and compose yourself and if--"

Two sharp reports of a rifle from without, interrupted the discourse, and Brown, entering,
reloaded his rifle and sat down to table.

"The cook's dead," he said. "Fever. A rather sudden attack."

"I was just telling Mr. Arkwright that there are no antidotes for native poisons--"

"Except gin," said Brown.

Harriwell called himself an absent-minded idiot and rushed for the gin bottle.

"Neat, man, neat," he warned Bertie, who gulped down a tumbler two-thirds full of the raw spirits,
and coughed and choked from the angry bite of it till the tears ran down his cheeks.

Harriwell took his pulse and temperature, made a show of looking out for him, and doubted that
the omelet had been poisoned. Brown and McTavish also doubted; but Bertie discerned an insincere
ring in their voices. His appetite had left him, and he took his own pulse stealthily under
the table. There was no question but what it was increasing, but he failed to ascribe it to
the gin he had taken. McTavish, rifle in hand, went out on the veranda to reconnoiter.

"They're massing up at the cook-house," was his report. "And they've no end of Sniders. My
idea is to sneak around on the other side and take them in flank. Strike the first blow, you
know. Will you come along, Brown?"

Harriwell ate on steadily, while Bertie discovered that his pulse had leaped up five beats.
Nevertheless, he could not help jumping when the rifles began to go off. Above the scattering
of Sniders could be heard the pumping of Brown's and McTavish's Winchesters--all against a
background of demoniacal screeching and yelling.

"They've got them on the run," Harriwell remarked, as voices and gunshots faded away in the
distance.

Scarcely were Brown and McTavish back at the table when the latter reconnoitered.

"They've got dynamite," he said.

"Then let's charge them with dynamite," Harriwell proposed.

Thrusting half a dozen sticks each into their pockets and equipping themselves with lighted
cigars, they started for the door. And just then it happened. They blamed McTavish for it afterward,
and he admitted that the charge had been a trifle excessive. But at any rate it went off under
the house, which lifted up cornerwise and settled back on its foundations. Half the china on
the table was shattered, while the eight-day clock stopped. Yelling for vengeance, the three
men rushed out into the night, and the bombardment began.

When they returned, there was no Bertie. He had dragged himself away to the office, barricaded
himself in, and sunk upon the floor in a gin-soaked nightmare, wherein he died a thousand deaths
while the valorous fight went on around him. In the morning, sick and headachey from the gin,
he crawled out to find the sun still in the sky and God presumable in heaven, for his hosts
were alive and uninjured.

Harriwell pressed him to stay on longer, but Bertie insisted on sailing immediately on the
Arla for Tulagi, where, until the following steamer day, he stuck close by the Commissioner's
house. There were lady tourists on the outgoing steamer, and Bertie was again a hero, while
Captain Malu, as usual, passed unnoticed. But Captain Malu sent back from Sydney two cases
of the best Scotch whiskey on the market, for he was not able to make up his mind as to whether
it was Captain Hansen or Mr Harriwell who had given Bertie Arkwright the more gorgeous insight
into life in the Solomons.

THE INEVITABLE WHITE MAN

"The black will never understand the white, nor the white the black, as long as black is black
and white is white."

So said Captain Woodward. We sat in the parlor of Charley Roberts' pub in Apia, drinking long
Abu Hameds compounded and shared with us by the aforesaid Charley Roberts, who claimed the
recipe direct from Stevens, famous for having invented the Abu Hamed at a time when he was
spurred on by Nile thirst--the Stevens who was responsible for "With Kitchener to Kartoun,"
and who passed out at the siege of Ladysmith.

Captain Woodward, short and squat, elderly, burned by forty years of tropic sun, and with the
most beautiful liquid brown eyes I ever saw in a man, spoke from a vast experience. The crisscross
of scars on his bald pate bespoke a tomahawk intimacy with the black, and of equal intimacy
was the advertisement, front and rear, on the right side of his neck, where an arrow had at
one time entered and been pulled clean through. As he explained, he had been in a hurry on
that occasion--the arrow impeded his running--and he felt that he could not take the time to
break off the head and pull out the shaft the way it had come in. At the present moment he
was commander of the SAVAII, the big steamer that recruited labor from the westward for the
German plantations on Samoa. 

In more recent Heraldry the Lion is a favourite Supporter: he now appears supporting the Shields
of the Dukes of NORFOLK, ARGYLL, ATHOLL, BEDFORD, GRAFTON, NORTHUMBERLAND, PORTLAND, and WELLINGTON;
also, with many others, those of the Marquesses of BATH, EXETER, HEADFORT, and SALISBURY; of the
Earls of ALBEMARLE, BROWNLOW, CARLISLE, CARNARVON, CORK, ESSEX, and
HARDWICK; of the Viscount HARDINGE; and of the Barons ARUNDEL, CAMOYS,
DUNBOYNE, MONSON, MOWBRAY, PETRE, and SOUTHAMPTON.

 Look at the missionaries in New
Guinea and the New Hebrides--the martyr isle of Erromanga and all the rest. Look at the Austrian
expedition that was cut to pieces in the Solomons, in the bush of Guadalcanar. And look at
the traders themselves, with a score of years' experience, making their brag that no nigger
would ever get them, and whose heads to this day are ornamenting the rafters of the canoe houses.
There was old Johnny Simons--twenty-six years on the raw edges of Melanesia, swore he knew
the niggers like a book and that they'd never do for him, and he passed out at Marovo Lagoon,
New Georgia, had his head sawed off by a black Mary (woman) and an old nigger with only one
leg, having left the other leg in the mouth of a shark while diving for dynamited fish. There
was Billy Watts, horrible reputation as a nigger killer, a man to scare the devil. I remember
lying at Cape Little, New Ireland you know, when the niggers stole half a case of trade-tobacco--cost
him about three dollars and a half. In retaliation he turned out, shot six niggers, smashed
up their war canoes and burned two villages. And it was at Cape Little, four years afterward,
that he was jumped along with fifty Buku boys he had with him fishing bêche-de-mer. In five
minutes they were all dead, with the exception of three boys who got away in a canoe. Don't
talk to me about understanding the nigger. The white man's mission is to farm the world, and
it's a big enough job cut out for him. What time has he got left to understand niggers anyway?"

"Just so," said Roberts. "And somehow it doesn't seem necessary, after all, to understand the
niggers. In direct proportion to the white man's stupidity is his success in farming the world--"

"And putting the fear of God into the nigger's heart," Captain Woodward blurted out. "Perhaps
you're right, Roberts. Perhaps it's his stupidity that makes him succeed, and surely one phase
of his stupidity is his inability to understand the niggers. But there's one thing sure, the
white has to run the niggers whether he understands them or not. It's inevitable. It's fate."

"And of course the white man is inevitable--it's the niggers' fate," Roberts broke in. "Tell
the white man there's pearl shell in some lagoon infested by ten-thousand howling cannibals,
and he'll head there all by his lonely, with half a dozen kanaka divers and a tin alarm clock
for chronometer, all packed like sardines on a commodious, five-ton ketch. Whisper that there's
a gold strike at the North Pole, and that same inevitable white-skinned creature will set out
at once, armed with pick and shovel, a side of bacon, and the latest patent rocker--and what's
more, he'll get there. Tip it off to him that there's diamonds on the red-hot ramparts of hell,
and Mr. White Man will storm the ramparts and set old Satan himself to pick-and-shovel work.
That's what comes of being stupid and inevitable."

"But I wonder what the black man must think of the--the inevitableness," I said.

Captain Woodward broke into quiet laughter. His eyes had a reminiscent gleam.

"I'm just wondering what the niggers of Malu thought and still must be thinking of the one
inevitable white man we had on board when we visited them in the DUCHESS," he explained.

Roberts mixed three more Abu Hameds.

"That was twenty years ago. Saxtorph was his name. He was certainly the most stupid man I ever
saw, but he was as inevitable as death. There was only one thing that chap could do, and that
was shoot. I remember the first time I ran into him--right here in Apia, twenty years ago.
That was before your time, Roberts. I was sleeping at Dutch Henry's hotel, down where the market
is now. Ever heard of him? He made a tidy stake smuggling arms in to the rebels, sold out his
hotel, and was killed in Sydney just six weeks afterward in a saloon row.

"But Saxtorph. One night I'd just got to sleep, when a couple of cats began to sing in the
courtyard. It was out of bed and up window, water jug in hand. But just then I heard the window
of the next room go up. Two shots were fired, and the window was closed. I fail to impress
you with the celerity of the transaction. Ten seconds at the outside. Up went the window, bang
bang went the revolver, and down went the window. Whoever it was, he had never stopped to see
the effect of his shots. He knew. Do you follow me?--he KNEW. There was no more cat concert,
and in the morning there lay the two offenders, stone dead. It was marvelous to me. It still
is marvelous. First, it was starlight, and Saxtorph shot without drawing a bead; next, he shot
so rapidly that the two reports were like a double report; and finally, he knew he had hit
his marks without looking to see.

"Two days afterward he came on board to see me. I was mate, then, on the Duchess, a whacking
big one-hundred-and fifty-ton schooner, a blackbirder. And let me tell you that blackbirders
were blackbirders in those days. There weren't any government protection for US, either. It
was rough work, give and take, if we were finished, and nothing said, and we ran niggers from
every south sea island they didn't kick us off from. Well, Saxtorph came on board, John Saxtorph
was the name he gave. He was a sandy little man, hair sandy, complexion sandy, and eyes sandy,
too. Nothing striking about him. His soul was as neutral as his color scheme. He said he was
strapped and wanted to ship on board. Would go cabin boy, cook, supercargo, or common sailor.
Didn't know anything about any of the billets, but said that he was willing to learn. I didn't
want him, but his shooting had so impressed me that I took him as common sailor, wages three
pounds per month.

"He was willing to learn all right, I'll say that much. But he was constitutionally unable
to learn anything. He could no more box the compass than I could mix drinks like Roberts here.
And as for steering, he gave me my first gray hairs. I never dared risk him at the wheel when
we were running in a big sea, while full-and-by and close-and-by were insoluble mysteries.
Couldn't ever tell the difference between a sheet and a tackle, simply couldn't. The fore-throat-jig
and the jib-jig were all one to him. Tell him to slack off the mainsheet, and before you know
it, he'd drop the peak. He fell overboard three times, and he couldn't swim. But he was always
cheerful, never seasick, and he was the most willing man I ever knew. He was an uncommunicative
soul. Never talked about himself. It appears, as a spiritual emblem, in several episcopal coats
of arms; in the arms of the CITY OF LONDON, No. 306, the first quarter of a Shield of ST. GEORGE
(arg., a cross gu.) is charged with a sword erect gules, the emblem
of ST. PAUL, the special patron of the English metropolitan city.

The sword is also borne in blazon in its military capacity.

Tabard. A short garment with sleeves, worn in the Tudor era. It has the arms blazoned on the sleeves
as well as on the front and back: No. 307, the Tabard of WILLIAM FYNDERNE, Esquire, from his
brass, A.D. 1444, at Childrey in Berkshire: the arms are--Arg., a chevron between three crosses
patée sable, the ordinary being charged with an annulet of the field “for Difference.” A similar
garment is the official habit of heralds.

Tau, Tau-Cross. See Chapter XV.

Templars, Knights. See Chapter XIX.

Tenent, Tenant. Used by French Heralds to distinguish human figures from animals, as supporters.

Tennée,
or Tawney. A deep orange-colour; in use in the Middle Ages as a livery-colour.

Thistle. The national Badge of SCOTLAND, represented after its national aspect, and tinctured
proper. JAMES I. of Great Britain, to symbolise the union of the two realms of England and Scotland,
compounded a Badge from the Rose of one realm, and the Thistle of
the other, united by impalement under a single crown: No. 308.

The impaled rose and thistle is borne by the Earl of KINNOULL, repeated eight times upon a bordure.

Timbre.
In the early Heraldry of England, this term denotes the true heraldic crest: but, in the modern
Heraldry of France, the “timbre” is the Helm in an armorial achievement. Timbred. Ensigned with
a Helm; or, if referring to an early English achievement, with a Crest. It is a term very seldom
met with in use.

Tiercée. In tierce, Per tierce. Divided into three equal parts.

Tinctures. The two metals and the five colours of Heraldry: Nos.

50-56. See page 40. It was one of the puerile extravagancies of the Heralds of degenerate days to distinguish
the Tinctures by the names of the Planets in blazoning the arms of
Sovereign Princes, and by the names of Gems in blazoning the arms
of Nobles.

Torse. A crest-wreath.

Torteau, plural torteaux. A red
spherical Roundle: No. 152.

Tower, Turret. A small castle. Towered.
Surmounted by towers, as No. 222, which is a “Castle triple towered.”

Transposed.
Reversed.

Trefoil. A leaf of three conjoined foils, generally borne
“slipped,” as in No. 309.

Treflée, or Botonée. A variety of the cross:
No. 103. Treflée also implies semée of trefoils.

Treille, Trellis.
See page 71, and No. 150.

Tressure. A subordinary. See pages 66,
67; and Nos. 135-8.

Tricked. Sketched in outline.

Trippant, or Tripping.
In easy motion, as a stag. I was fascinated by that growing
vision of death. The tomahawk seemed to take a horribly long time to come down. I saw it land,
and the man's legs give under him as he crumpled. The niggers held him up by sheer strength
while he was hacked a couple of times more. Then I got two more hacks on the head and decided
that I was dead. So did the brute that was hacking me. I was too helpless to move, and I lay
there and watched them removing the sentry's head. I must say they did it slick enough. They
were old hands at the business.

"The rifle firing from the boats had ceased, and I made no doubt that they were finished off
and that the end had come to everything. It was only a matter of moments when they would return
for my head. They were evidently taking the heads from the sailors aft. Heads are valuable
on Malaita, especially white heads. They have the place of honor in the canoe houses of the
salt-water natives. What particular decorative effect the bushmen get out of them I didn't
know, but they prize them just as much as the salt-water crowd.

"I had a dim notion of escaping, and I crawled on hands and knees to the winch, where I managed
to drag myself to my feet. From there I could look aft and see three heads on top the cabin--the
heads of three sailors I had given orders to for months. The niggers saw me standing, and started
for me. I reached for my revolver, and found they had taken it. I can't say that I was scared.
I've been near to death several times, but it never seemed easier than right then. I was half-stunned,
and nothing seemed to matter.

"The leading nigger had armed himself with a cleaver from the galley, and he grimaced like
an ape as he prepared to slice me down. But the slice was never made. He went down on the deck
all of a heap, and I saw the blood gush from his mouth. In a dim way I heard a rifle go off
and continue to go off. Nigger after nigger went down. My senses began to clear, and I noted
that there was never a miss. Every time that the rifle went off a nigger dropped. I sat down
on deck beside the winch and looked up. Perched in the crosstrees was Saxtorph. How he had
managed it I can't imagine, for he had carried up with him two Winchesters and I don't know
how many bandoliers of ammunition; and he was now doing the one only thing in this world that
he was fitted to do.

"I've seen shooting and slaughter, but I never saw anything like that. I sat by the winch and
watched the show. I was weak and faint, and it seemed to be all a dream. Bang, bang, bang,
bang, went his rifle, and thud, thud, thud, thud, went the niggers to the deck. It was amazing
to see them go down. After their first rush to get me, when about a dozen had dropped, they
seemed paralyzed; but he never left off pumping his gun. By this time canoes and the two boats
arrived from shore, armed with Sniders, and with Winchesters which they had captured in the
boats. The fusillade they let loose on Saxtorph was tremendous. Luckily for him the niggers
are only good at close range. They are not used to putting the gun to their shoulders. They
wait until they are right on top of a man, and then they shoot from the hip. When his rifle
got too hot, Saxtorph changed off. That had been his idea when he carried two rifles up with him.

"The astounding thing was the rapidity of his fire. Also, he never made a miss. If ever anything
was inevitable, that man was. It was the swiftness of it that made the slaughter so appalling.
The niggers did not have time to think. When they did manage to think, they went over the side
in a rush, capsizing the canoes of course. Saxtorph never let up. The water was covered with
them, and plump, plump, plump, he dropped his bullets into them. Not a single miss, and I could
hear distinctly the thud of every bullet as it buried in human flesh.

"The niggers spread out and headed for the shore, swimming. The water was carpeted with bobbing
heads, and I stood up, as in a dream, and watched it all--the bobbing heads and the heads that
ceased to bob. Some of the long shots were magnificent. Only one man reached the beach, but
as he stood up to wade ashore, Saxtorph got him. It was beautiful. And when a couple of niggers
ran down to drag him out of the water, Saxtorph got them, too.

"I thought everything was over then, when I heard the rifle go off again. A nigger had come
out of the cabin companion on the run for the rail and gone down in the middle of it. The cabin
must have been full of them. I counted twenty. They came up one at a time and jumped for the
rail. But they never got there. It reminded me of trapshooting. A black body would pop out
of the companion, bang would go Saxtorph's rifle, and down would go the black body. Of course,
those below did not know what was happening on deck, so they continued to pop out until the
last one was finished off.

"Saxtorph waited a while to make sure, and then came down on deck. He and I were all that were
left of the DUCHESS'S complement, and I was pretty well to the bad, while he was helpless now
that the shooting was over. Under my direction he washed out my scalp wounds and sewed them
up. A big drink of whiskey braced me to make an effort to get out. There was nothing else to
do. All the rest were dead. We tried to get up sail, Saxtorph hoisting and I holding the turn.
He was once more the stupid lubber. He couldn't hoist worth a cent, and when I fell in a faint,
it looked all up with us.

"When I came to, Saxtorph was sitting helplessly on the rail, waiting to ask me what he should
do. I told him to overhaul the wounded and see if there were any able to crawl. He gathered
together six. One, I remember, had a broken leg; but Saxtorph said his arms were all right.
I lay in the shade, brushing the flies off and directing operations, while Saxtorph bossed
his hospital gang. I'll be blessed if he didn't make those poor niggers heave at every rope
on the pin-rails before he found the halyards. One of them let go the rope in the midst of
the hoisting and slipped down to the deck dead; but Saxtorph hammered the others and made them
stick by the job. It must be distinctly understood, however, that there exists no certain authority
for these Arms.

In like manner, STEPHEN is also said to have borne on a red Shield
three golden Sagittaries, or Centaurs, with bows and arrows.

And, again, HENRY II. is considered to have added a third lion to the two on the Shield of his father,
a single golden lion passant guardant on red being (also considered to be) the armorial ensign of
the province of Aquitaine, acquired by HENRY in right of his Consort, ALIANORE.

As early as the reign of HENRY III., a Shield of Arms, No. 23, was assigned to the Anglo-Saxon
Kings: another Shield, No. 2, was assigned to EDWARD THE CONFESSOR: and a third Shield, No.
3, to another sainted Anglo-Saxon Prince, EDMUND.

From the appearance of the Second Great Seal of RICHARD I., about A.D. 1195, all uncertainty
concerning the Royal Arms of England is at an end, and they are borne as follows by the successive
English Sovereigns:--

RICHARD I.: JOHN: HENRY III.: EDWARD I.: EDWARD II.: and EDWARD III.,
till the thirteenth year of his reign, A.D. 1340:--Gu., three lions
passant guardant in pale or,--No. 187.

EDWARD III., from the thirteenth year of his reign, when he claimed to be King of France as well
as of England, and so styled himself: RICHARD II.: and HENRY IV.,
till about the fifth year of his reign:--France Ancient and England
quarterly,--No. 252.

RICHARD II. sometimes bore the Arms of the CONFESSOR, No. 2, with his own, on a separate shield,
as at Westminster Hall; and sometimes he impaled the Confessor’s Arms with his own quartered
Shield, the arms of the Confessor having the precedence.

HENRY IV. from about 1405: HENRY V.: HENRY VI.: EDWARD IV.: EDWARD V.:
RICHARD III.: HENRY VII.: HENRY VIII.: EDWARD VI.: MARY: and ELIZABETH,
to A.D. 1603:--France Modern and England Quarterly, No. 253.

The
Royal Shield of SCOTLAND, No. 138, first appears upon the Seal of
ALEXANDER II. about A.D. 1235; and, as Mr. Seton well observes, the
origin of its bearings “is veiled by the mists of Antiquity.” The
same Shield, without any modification or change, was borne by all
the Sovereigns of Scotland. "Farming the world. Well here's to them. Somebody's
got to do it--farm the world, I mean."

Captain Woodward rubbed the criss-crosses on his bald head.

"I've done my share of it," he said. "Forty years now. This will be my last trip. Then I'm
going home to stay."

"I'll wager the wine you don't," Roberts challenged. "You'll die in the harness, not at home."

Captain Woodward promptly accepted the bet, but personally I think Charley Roberts has the
best of it.

THE SEED OF McCOY

The Pyrenees, her iron sides pressed low in the water by her cargo of wheat, rolled sluggishly,
and made it easy for the man who was climbing aboard from out a tiny outrigger canoe. As his
eyes came level with the rail, so that he could see inboard, it seemed to him that he saw a
dim, almost indiscernible haze. It was more like an illusion, like a blurring film that had
spread abruptly over his eyes. He felt an inclination to brush it away, and the same instant
he thought that he was growing old and that it was time to send to San Francisco for a pair
of spectacles.

As he came over the rail he cast a glance aloft at the tall masts, and, next, at the pumps.
They were not working. There seemed nothing the matter with the big ship, and he wondered why
she had hoisted the signal of distress. He thought of his happy islanders, and hoped it was
not disease. Perhaps the ship was short of water or provisions. He shook hands with the captain
whose gaunt face and care-worn eyes made no secret of the trouble, whatever it was. At the
same moment the newcomer was aware of a faint, indefinable smell. It seemed like that of burnt
bread, but different.

He glanced curiously about him. Twenty feet away a weary-faced sailor was calking the deck.
As his eyes lingered on the man, he saw suddenly arise from under his hands a faint spiral
of haze that curled and twisted and was gone. By now he had reached the deck. His bare feet
were pervaded by a dull warmth that quickly penetrated the thick calluses. He knew now the
nature of the ship's distress. His eyes roved swiftly forward, where the full crew of weary-faced
sailors regarded him eagerly. The glance from his liquid brown eyes swept over them like a
benediction, soothing them, rapping them about as in the mantle of a great peace. "How long
has she been afire, Captain?" he asked in a voice so gentle and unperturbed that it was as
the cooing of a dove.

At first the captain felt the peace and content of it stealing in upon him; then the consciousness
of all that he had gone through and was going through smote him, and he was resentful. By what
right did this ragged beachcomber, in dungaree trousers and a cotton shirt, suggest such a
thing as peace and content to him and his overwrought, exhausted soul? The captain did not
reason this; it was the unconscious process of emotion that caused his resentment.

"Fifteen days," he answered shortly. "Who are you?"

"My name is McCoy," came the answer in tones that breathed tenderness and compassion.

"I mean, are you the pilot?"

McCoy passed the benediction of his gaze over the tall, heavy-shouldered man with the haggard,
unshaven face who had joined the captain.

"I am as much a pilot as anybody," was McCoy's answer. "We are all pilots here, Captain, and
I know every inch of these waters."

But the captain was impatient.

"What I want is some of the authorities. I want to talk with them, and blame quick."

"Then I'll do just as well."

Again that insidious suggestion of peace, and his ship a raging furnace beneath his feet! The
captain's eyebrows lifted impatiently and nervously, and his fist clenched as if he were about
to strike a blow with it.

"Who in hell are you?" he demanded.

"I am the chief magistrate," was the reply in a voice that was still the softest and gentlest
imaginable.

The tall, heavy-shouldered man broke out in a harsh laugh that was partly amusement, but mostly
hysterical. Both he and the captain regarded McCoy with incredulity and amazement. That this
barefooted beachcomber should possess such high-sounding dignity was inconceivable. His cotton
shirt, unbuttoned, exposed a grizzled chest and the fact that there was no undershirt beneath.

A worn straw hat failed to hide the ragged gray hair. Halfway down his chest descended an untrimmed
patriarchal beard. In any slop shop, two shillings would have outfitted him complete as he
stood before them.

"Any relation to the McCoy of the Bounty?" the captain asked.

"He was my great-grandfather."

"Oh," the captain said, then bethought himself. "My name is Davenport, and this is my first
mate, Mr. Konig."

They shook hands.

"And now to business." The captain spoke quickly, the urgency of a great haste pressing his
speech. "We've been on fire for over two weeks. She's ready to break all hell loose any moment.
That's why I held for Pitcairn. I want to beach her, or scuttle her, and save the hull."

"Then you made a mistake, Captain," said McCoy. "You should have slacked away for Mangareva.
There's a beautiful beach there, in a lagoon where the water is like a mill pond."

"But we're here, ain't we?" the first mate demanded. "That's the point. We're here, and we've
got to do something."

McCoy shook his head kindly.

"You can do nothing here. There is no beach. There isn't even anchorage."

"Gammon!" said the mate. "Gammon!" he repeated loudly, as the captain signaled him to be more
soft spoken. "You can't tell me that sort of stuff. Where d'ye keep your own boats, hey--your
schooner, or cutter, or whatever you have? Hey? Answer me that."

McCoy smiled as gently as he spoke. His smile was a caress, an embrace that surrounded the
tired mate and sought to draw him into the quietude and rest of McCoy's tranquil soul.

"We have no schooner or cutter," he replied. "And we carry our canoes to the top of the cliff."

"You've got to show me," snorted the mate. "How d'ye get around to the other islands, heh?
Tell me that."

"We don't get around. As governor of Pitcairn, I sometimes go. When I was younger, I was away
a great deal--sometimes on the trading schooners, but mostly on the missionary brig. But she's
gone now, and we depend on passing vessels. Sometimes we have had as high as six calls in one
year. At other times, a year, and even longer, has gone by without one passing ship. Yours
is the first in seven months."

"And you mean to tell me--" the mate began.

But Captain Davenport interfered.

"Enough of this. We're losing time. What is to be done, Mr. McCoy?"

The old man turned his brown eyes, sweet as a woman's, shoreward, and both captain and mate
followed his gaze around from the lonely rock of Pitcairn to the crew clustering forward and
waiting anxiously for the announcement of a decision. McCoy did not hurry. He thought smoothly
and slowly, step by step, with the certitude of a mind that was never vexed or outraged by life.

"The wind is light now," he said finally. "There is a heavy current setting to the westward."

"That's what made us fetch to leeward," the captain interrupted, desiring to vindicate his
seamanship.

"Yes, that is what fetched you to leeward," McCoy went on. "Well, you can't work up against
this current today. And if you did, there is no beach. Your ship will be a total loss."

He paused, and captain and mate looked despair at each other.

"But I will tell you what you can do. The breeze will freshen tonight around midnight--see
those tails of clouds and that thickness to windward, beyond the point there? That's where
she'll come from, out of the southeast, hard. It is three hundred miles to Mangareva. Square
away for it. There is a beautiful bed for your ship there."

The mate shook his head.

"Come in to the cabin, and we'll look at the chart," said the captain.

McCoy found a stifling, poisonous atmosphere in the pent cabin. Stray waftures of invisible
gases bit his eyes and made them sting. The deck was hotter, almost unbearably hot to his bare
feet. The sweat poured out of his body. He looked almost with apprehension about him. This
malignant, internal heat was astounding. It was a marvel that the cabin did not burst into
flames. He had a feeling as if of being in a huge bake oven where the heat might at any moment
increase tremendously and shrivel him up like a blade of grass.

As he lifted one foot and rubbed the hot sole against the leg of his trousers, the mate laughed
in a savage, snarling fashion.

"The anteroom of hell," he said. "Hell herself is right down there under your feet."

"It's hot!" McCoy cried involuntarily, mopping his face with a bandana handkerchief.

"Here's Mangareva," the captain said, bending over the table and pointing to a black speck
in the midst of the white blankness of the chart. "And here, in between, is another island.
Why not run for that?"

McCoy did not look at the chart.

"That's Crescent Island," he answered. "It is uninhabited, and it is only two or three feet
above water. Lagoon, but no entrance. No, Mangareva is the nearest place for your purpose."

"Mangareva it is, then," said Captain Davenport, interrupting the mate's growling objection.
"Call the crew aft, Mr. Konig."

The sailors obeyed, shuffling wearily along the deck and painfully endeavoring to make haste.
Exhaustion was evident in every movement. The cook came out of his galley to hear, and the
cabin boy hung about near him.

When Captain Davenport had explained the situation and announced his intention of running for
Mangareva, an uproar broke out. Against a background of throaty rumbling arose inarticulate
cries of rage, with here and there a distinct curse, or word, or phrase. A shrill Cockney voice
soared and dominated for a moment, crying: "Gawd! After bein' in ell for fifteen days--an'
now e wants us to sail this floatin' ell to sea again?"

The captain could not control them, but McCoy's gentle presence seemed to rebuke and calm them,
and the muttering and cursing died away, until the full crew, save here and there an anxious
face directed at the captain, yearned dumbly toward the green clad peaks and beetling coast
of Pitcairn. 

Men wore the ensigns of Heraldry about their persons, embroidered
upon the garments that partially covered their armour,--and so they
called them Coats-of-Arms: they bore these same ensigns on their shields,--and
they called them Shields-of-Arms: and in their Armorial Banners and
Pennons they again displayed the very same insignia, floating in the
wind high above their heads, from the shafts of their lances.

The Heraldry or Armory of England, an honourable and honoured member of the illustrious family of
mediæval European Heraldry, may be defined as a symbolical and pictorial language, in which
figures, devices, and colours are employed instead of letters.

Each heraldic composition has its own definite and complete significance, conveyed through its direct
connection with some particular individual, family, dignity, or office. Every such heraldic composition,
also, is a true legal possession, held and maintained by an express right and title: and it is
hereditary, like other real property, in accordance with certain laws and precedents of inheritance.
But in this respect heraldic insignia are singular and unlike other
property, inasmuch as it is a general rule that they cannot be alienated,
exchanged, or transferred otherwise than by inheritance or other lawful
succession.

Exceptions to this rule, when they are observed occasionally to have occurred, show clearly
their own exceptional character, and consequently they confirm the true authority of the rule
itself.

It will be understood, as a necessary quality of its hereditary nature, that the significance
of an heraldic composition, while “definite and complete” in itself, admits of augmentation and
expansion through its association with successive generations. Thus, the Royal Shield of EDWARD III.
is “complete” as the heraldic symbol of that great monarch, and of the realm under his rule:
and yet this same shield, equally “complete” (with one simple modification) as the heraldic
symbol of each successive Sovereign till the death of ELIZABETH, has its significance infinitely augmented
and expanded through its hereditary association with all the Sovereigns
of the Houses of Plantagenet and Tudor.

Until the concluding quarter of the twelfth century, the traces of
the existence of Heraldry are faint and few in number.



"But what if the fire breaks out? It is liable to do it any moment."

"Have your boats ready in the falls. The same breeze will carry your boats to Mangareva if
the ship burns out from under."

Captain Davenport debated for a moment, and then McCoy heard the question he had not wanted
to hear, but which he knew was surely coming.

"I have no chart of Mangareva. On the general chart it is only a fly speck. I would not know
where to look for the entrance into the lagoon. Will you come along and pilot her in for me?"

McCoy's serenity was unbroken.

"Yes, Captain," he said, with the same quiet unconcern with which he would have accepted an
invitation to dinner; "I'll go with you to Mangareva."

Again the crew was called aft, and the captain spoke to them from the break of the poop.

"We've tried to work her up, but you see how we've lost ground. She's setting off in a two-knot
current. This gentleman is the Honorable McCoy, Chief Magistrate and Governor of Pitcairn Island.
He will come along with us to Mangareva. So you see the situation is not so dangerous. He would
not make such an offer if he thought he was going to lose his life. Besides, whatever risk
there is, if he of his own free will come on board and take it, we can do no less. What do
you say for Mangareva?"

This time there was no uproar. McCoy's presence, the surety and calm that seemed to radiate
from him, had had its effect. They conferred with one another in low voices. There was little
urging. They were virtually unanimous, and they shoved the Cockney out as their spokesman.
That worthy was overwhelmed with consciousness of the heroism of himself and his mates, and
with flashing eyes he cried:

"By Gawd! If 'e will, we will!"

The crew mumbled its assent and started forward.

"One moment, Captain," McCoy said, as the other was turning to give orders to the mate. "I
must go ashore first."

Mr. Konig was thunderstruck, staring at McCoy as if he were a madman.

"Go ashore!" the captain cried. "What for? It will take you three hours to get there in your
canoe."

McCoy measured the distance of the land away, and nodded.

"Yes, it is six now. I won't get ashore till nine. The people cannot be assembled earlier than
ten. As the breeze freshens up tonight, you can begin to work up against it, and pick me up
at daylight tomorrow morning."

"In the name of reason and common sense," the captain burst forth, "what do you want to assemble
the people for? Don't you realize that my ship is burning beneath me?"

McCoy was as placid as a summer sea, and the other's anger produced not the slightest ripple
upon it.

"Yes, Captain," he cooed in his dove-like voice. "I do realize that your ship is burning. That
is why I am going with you to Mangareva. But I must get permission to go with you. It is our
custom. It is an important matter when the governor leaves the island. The people's interests
are at stake, and so they have the right to vote their permission or refusal. But they will
give it, I know that."

"Are you sure?"

"Quite sure."

"Then if you know they will give it, why bother with getting it? Think of the delay--a whole
night."

"It is our custom," was the imperturbable reply. "Also, I am the governor, and I must make
arrangements for the conduct of the island during my absence."

"But it is only a twenty-four hour run to Mangareva," the captain objected. "Suppose it took
you six times that long to return to windward; that would bring you back by the end of a week."

McCoy smiled his large, benevolent smile.

"Very few vessels come to Pitcairn, and when they do, they are usually from San Francisco or
from around the Horn. I shall be fortunate if I get back in six months. I may be away a year,
and I may have to go to San Francisco in order to find a vessel that will bring me back. My
father once left Pitcairn to be gone three months, and two years passed before he could get
back. Then, too, you are short of food. If you have to take to the boats, and the weather comes
up bad, you may be days in reaching land. I can bring off two canoe loads of food in the morning.
Dried bananas will be best. As the breeze freshens, you beat up against it. The nearer you
are, the bigger loads I can bring off. Goodby."

He held out his hand. The captain shook it, and was reluctant to let go. He seemed to cling
to it as a drowning sailor clings to a life buoy.

"How do I know you will come back in the morning?" he asked.

"Yes, that's it!" cried the mate. "How do we know but what he's skinning out to save his own hide?"

McCoy did not speak. He looked at them sweetly and benignantly, and it seemed to them that
they received a message from his tremendous certitude of soul.

The captain released his hand, and, with a last sweeping glance that embraced the crew in its
benediction, McCoy went over the rail and descended into his canoe.

The wind freshened, and the Pyrenees, despite the foulness of her bottom, won half a dozen
miles away from the westerly current. At daylight, with Pitcairn three miles to windward, Captain
Davenport made out two canoes coming off to him. Again McCoy clambered up the side and dropped
over the rail to the hot deck. He was followed by many packages of dried bananas, each package
wrapped in dry leaves.

"Now, Captain," he said, "swing the yards and drive for dear life. You see, I am no navigator,"
he explained a few minutes later, as he stood by the captain aft, the latter with gaze wandering
from aloft to overside as he estimated the Pyrenees' speed. "You must fetch her to Mangareva.
When you have picked up the land, then I will pilot her in. What do you think she is making?"

"Eleven," Captain Davenport answered, with a final glance at the water rushing past.

"Eleven. Let me see, if she keeps up that gait, we'll sight Mangareva between eight and nine
o'clock tomorrow morning. I'll have her on the beach by ten or by eleven at latest. And then
your troubles will be all over."

It almost seemed to the captain that the blissful moment had already arrived, such was the
persuasive convincingness of McCoy.

Captain Davenport had been under the fearful strain of navigating his burning ship for over
two weeks, and he was beginning to feel that he had had enough.

A heavier flaw of wind struck the back of his neck and whistled by his ears. He measured the
weight of it, and looked quickly overside.

"The wind is making all the time," he announced. "The old girl's doing nearer twelve than eleven
right now. If this keeps up, we'll be shortening down tonight."

All day the Pyrenees, carrying her load of living fire, tore across the foaming sea. By nightfall,
royals and topgallantsails were in, and she flew on into the darkness, with great, crested
seas roaring after her. The auspicious wind had had its effect, and fore and aft a visible
brightening was apparent. In the second dog-watch some careless soul started a song, and by
eight bells the whole crew was singing.

Captain Davenport had his blankets brought up and spread on top the house.

"I've forgotten what sleep is," he explained to McCoy. "I'm all in. But give me a call at any
time you think necessary."

At three in the morning he was aroused by a gentle tugging at his arm. He sat up quickly, bracing
himself against the skylight, stupid yet from his heavy sleep. The wind was thrumming its war
song in the rigging, and a wild sea was buffeting the PYRENEES. Amidships she was wallowing
first one rail under and then the other, flooding the waist more often than not. McCoy was
shouting something he could not hear. He reached out, clutched the other by the shoulder, and
drew him close so that his own ear was close to the other's lips.

"It's three o'clock," came McCoy's voice, still retaining its dovelike quality, but curiously
muffled, as if from a long way off. "We've run two hundred and fifty. Crescent Island is only
thirty miles away, somewhere there dead ahead. There's no lights on it. If we keep running,
we'll pile up, and lose ourselves as well as the ship."

"What d' ye think--heave to?"

"Yes; heave to till daylight. It will only put us back four hours."

So the Pyrenees, with her cargo of fire, was hove to, bitting the teeth of the gale and fighting
and smashing the pounding seas. She was a shell, filled with a conflagration, and on the outside
of the shell, clinging precariously, the little motes of men, by pull and haul, helped her
in the battle.

"It is most unusual, this gale," McCoy told the captain, in the lee of the cabin. "By rights
there should be no gale at this time of the year. But everything about the weather has been
unusual. There has been a stoppage of the trades, and now it's howling right out of the trade
quarter." He waved his hand into the darkness, as if his vision could dimly penetrate for hundreds
of miles. "It is off to the westward. There is something big making off there somewhere--a
hurricane or something. We're lucky to be so far to the eastward. But this is only a little
blow," he added. "It can't last. I can tell you that much."

By daylight the gale had eased down to normal. But daylight revealed a new danger. It had come
on thick. The sea was covered by a fog, or, rather, by a pearly mist that was fog-like in density,
in so far as it obstructed vision, but that was no more than a film on the sea, for the sun
shot it through and filled it with a glowing radiance.

The deck of the Pyrenees was making more smoke than on the preceding day, and the cheerfulness
of officers and crew had vanished. In the lee of the galley the cabin boy could be heard whimpering.
It was his first voyage, and the fear of death was at his heart. The captain wandered about
like a lost soul, nervously chewing his mustache, scowling, unable to make up his mind what to do.

"What do you think?" he asked, pausing by the side of McCoy, who was making a breakfast off
fried bananas and a mug of water.

McCoy finished the last banana, drained the mug, and looked slowly around. In his eyes was
a smile of tenderness as he said:

"Well, Captain, we might as well drive as burn. Your decks are not going to hold out forever.
They are hotter this morning. You haven't a pair of shoes I can wear? It is getting uncomfortable
for my bare feet."

The Pyrenees shipped two heavy seas as she was swung off and put once more before it, and the
first mate expressed a desire to have all that water down in the hold, if only it could be
introduced without taking off the hatches. McCoy ducked his head into the binnacle and watched
the course set.

"I'd hold her up some more, Captain," he said. "She's been making drift when hove to."

"I've set it to a point higher already," was the answer. "Isn't that enough?"

"I'd make it two points, Captain. This bit of a blow kicked that westerly current ahead faster
than you imagine."

Captain Davenport compromised on a point and a half, and then went aloft, accompanied by McCoy
and the first mate, to keep a lookout for land. Sail had been made, so that the Pyrenees was
doing ten knots. The following sea was dying down rapidly. There was no break in the pearly
fog, and by ten o'clock Captain Davenport was growing nervous. All hands were at their stations,
ready, at the first warning of land ahead, to spring like fiends to the task of bringing the
Pyrenees up on the wind. That land ahead, a surf-washed outer reef, would be perilously close
when it revealed itself in such a fog.

Another hour passed. The three watchers aloft stared intently into the pearly radiance. "What
if we miss Mangareva?" Captain Davenport asked abruptly.

McCoy, without shifting his gaze, answered softly:

"Why, let her drive, captain. That is all we can do. All the Paumotus are before us. We can
drive for a thousand miles through reefs and atolls. We are bound to fetch up somewhere."

"Then drive it is." Captain Davenport evidenced his intention of descending to the deck. "We've
missed Mangareva. God knows where the next land is. I wish I'd held her up that other half-point,"
he confessed a moment later. "This cursed current plays the devil with a navigator."

"The old navigators called the Paumotus the Dangerous Archipelago," McCoy said, when they had
regained the poop. "This very current was partly responsible for that name."

"I was talking with a sailor chap in Sydney, once," said Mr. Konig. "He'd been trading in the
Paumotus. He told me insurance was eighteen per cent. Is that right?"

McCoy smiled and nodded.

"Except that they don't insure," he explained. "The owners write off twenty per cent of the
cost of their schooners each year."

"My God!" Captain Davenport groaned. "That makes the life of a schooner only five years!" He
shook his head sadly, murmuring, "Bad waters! Bad waters!"

Again they went into the cabin to consult the big general chart; but the poisonous vapors drove
them coughing and gasping on deck.

"Here is Moerenhout Island," Captain Davenport pointed it out on the chart, which he had spread
on the house. "It can't be more than a hundred miles to leeward."

"A hundred and ten." McCoy shook his head doubtfully. "It might be done, but it is very difficult.
I might beach her, and then again I might put her on the reef. A bad place, a very bad place."

"We'll take the chance," was Captain Davenport's decision, as he set about working out the course.

Sail was shortened early in the afternoon, to avoid running past in the night; and in the second
dog-watch the crew manifested its regained cheerfulness. Land was so very near, and their troubles
would be over in the morning.

But morning broke clear, with a blazing tropic sun. The southeast trade had swung around to
the eastward, and was driving the PYRENEES through the water at an eight-knot clip. Captain
Davenport worked up his dead reckoning, allowing generously for drift, and announced Moerenhout
Island to be not more than ten miles off. The Pyrenees sailed the ten miles; she sailed ten
miles more; and the lookouts at the three mastheads saw naught but the naked, sun-washed sea.

"But the land is there, I tell you," Captain Davenport shouted to them from the poop.

McCoy smiled soothingly, but the captain glared about him like a madman, fetched his sextant,
and took a chronometer sight.

"I knew I was right," he almost shouted, when he had worked up the observation. "Twenty-one,
fifty-five, south; one-thirty-six, two, west. There you are. We're eight miles to windward
yet. What did you make it out, Mr. Konig?"

The first mate glanced at his own figures, and said in a low voice:

"Twenty-one, fifty-five all right; but my longitude's one-thirty-six, forty-eight. That puts
us considerably to leeward--"

But Captain Davenport ignored his figures with so contemptuous a silence as to make Mr. Konig
grit his teeth and curse savagely under his breath.

"Keep her off," the captain ordered the man at the wheel. "Three points--steady there, as she
goes!"

Then he returned to his figures and worked them over. The sweat poured from his face. He chewed
his mustache, his lips, and his pencil, staring at the figures as a man might at a ghost. Suddenly,
with a fierce, muscular outburst, he crumpled the scribbled paper in his fist and crushed it
under foot. Mr. Konig grinned vindictively and turned away, while Captain Davenport leaned
against the cabin and for half an hour spoke no word, contenting himself with gazing to leeward
with an expression of musing hopelessness on his face.

"Mr. McCoy," he broke silence abruptly. "The chart indicates a group of islands, but not how
many, off there to the north'ard, or nor'-nor'westward, about forty miles--the Acteon Islands.
What about them?"

"There are four, all low," McCoy answered. "First to the southeast is Matuerui--no people,
no entrance to the lagoon. Then comes Tenarunga. There used to be about a dozen people there,
but they may be all gone now. Anyway, there is no entrance for a ship--only a boat entrance,
with a fathom of water. Vehauga and Teua-raro are the other two. No entrances, no people, very
low. There is no bed for the Pyrenees in that group. She would be a total wreck."

"Listen to that!" Captain Davenport was frantic. "No people! No entrances! What in the devil
are islands good for?

"Well, then," he barked suddenly, like an excited terrier, "the chart gives a whole mess of
islands off to the nor'west. What about them? What one has an entrance where I can lay my ship?"

McCoy calmly considered. He did not refer to the chart. All these islands, reefs, shoals, lagoons,
entrances, and distances were marked on the chart of his memory. He knew them as the city dweller
knows his buildings, streets, and alleys.

"Papakena and Vanavana are off there to the westward, or west-nor'westward a hundred miles
and a bit more," he said. "One is uninhabited, and I heard that the people on the other had
gone off to Cadmus Island. Anyway, neither lagoon has an entrance. Ahunui is another hundred
miles on to the nor'west. No entrance, no people."

"Well, forty miles beyond them are two islands?" Captain Davenport queried, raising his head
from the chart.

McCoy shook his head.

"Paros and Manuhungi--no entrances, no people. Nengo-Nengo is forty miles beyond them, in turn,
and it has no people and no entrance. But there is Hao Island. It is just the place. The lagoon
is thirty miles long and five miles wide. There are plenty of people. You can usually find
water. And any ship in the world can go through the entrance."

He ceased and gazed solicitously at Captain Davenport, who, bending over the chart with a pair
of dividers in hand, had just emitted a low groan.

"Is there any lagoon with an entrance anywhere nearer than Hao Island?" he asked.

"No, Captain; that is the nearest."

"Well, it's three hundred and forty miles." Captain Davenport was speaking very slowly, with
decision. "I won't risk the responsibility of all these lives. I'll wreck her on the Acteons.
And she's a good ship, too," he added regretfully, after altering the course, this time making
more allowance than ever for the westerly current.

An hour later the sky was overcast. The southeast trade still held, but the ocean was a checker
board of squalls.

"We'll be there by one o'clock," Captain Davenport announced confidently. "By two o'clock at
the outside. McCoy, you put her ashore on the one where the people are."

The sun did not appear again, nor, at one o'clock, was any land to be seen. Captain Davenport
looked astern at the Pyrenees' canting wake.

"Good Lord!" he cried. "An easterly current? Look at that!"

Mr. Konig was incredulous. McCoy was noncommittal, though he said that in the Paumotus there
was no reason why it should not be an easterly current. A few minutes later a squall robbed
the Pyrenees temporarily of all her wind, and she was left rolling heavily in the trough.

"Where's that deep lead? Over with it, you there!" Captain Davenport held the lead line and
watched it sag off to the northeast. "There, look at that! Take hold of it for yourself."

McCoy and the mate tried it, and felt the line thrumming and vibrating savagely to the grip
of the tidal stream.

"A four-knot current," said Mr. Konig.

"An easterly current instead of a westerly," said Captain "Davenport, glaring accusingly at
McCoy, as if to cast the blame for it upon him.

"That is one of the reasons, Captain, for insurance being eighteen per cent in these waters,"
McCoy answered cheerfully. "You can never tell. The currents are always changing. There was
a man who wrote books, I forget his name, in the yacht Casco. A Lion was the Ensign of the Native
Princes of WALES, as he was of the Kings of LEON, of NORWAY, and of DENMARK, and of the Counts
of HOLLAND, HAINAULT, EU, &c. And, in like manner, the Lion was in
high favour with the most noble and powerful Barons of England--the
MOWBRAYS, BOHUNS, LONGESPEES, FITZ-ALANS, LACIES, PERCIES, SEGRAVES,
and such as they.

It was a necessary consequence of his great popularity that the Lion
of Heraldry should be blazoned in various attitudes, and also variously
tinctured, otherwise it would not be possible duly to distinguish
the Lions of different Shields.

Heralds of all countries appear readily to have permitted their Lions to lay aside their natural
tawny hue, and in its stead to assume the heraldic or, argent, azure, gules, and sable; but
Continental Heralds were not generally disposed to recognise in their
Lions any other attitude than the one which they held to be consistent
with their Lion character, instincts, and habits--erect, that is,
with one hind paw only on the ground, looking forward towards their
prey, so as to show but one eye, and evidently in the act of preparing
to spring.

This undoubtedly most characteristic attitude is rampant, No. 171: and only when he was in this
rampant attitude did the early Heralds consider any Lion to be a Lion, and blazon him by his true
name. A Lion walking and looking about him, the early Heralds held to be acting the part of a leopard:
consequently, when he was in any such attitude, they blazoned him as “a leopard.” The animal
bearing that name bore it simply as an heraldic title, which distinguished a Lion in a particular
attitude.

These heraldic “leopards” were drawn in every respect as other heraldic “lions,” without spots
or any leopardish distinction whatever.

This explains the usage, retained till late in the fourteenth century,
which assigned to the Lions of the Royal Shield of England the name
of “leopards.” They were so called, not by the enemies of England
for derision and insult, as some persons, in their ignorance of early
Heraldry, have been pleased both to imagine and to assert; but the
English Kings and Princes, who well knew their “Lions” to be Lions,
in blazon styled them “leopards,” because they also knew that Lions
in the attitude of their “Lions” were heraldic “leopards.” When at
length the necessity of varying the attitude of their Lions was admitted
by all Heralds, in consequence of the greatly increased numbers of
the bearers of Lions, some strict adherents to the original distinctive
nomenclature blazoned any Lion that was not rampant by the compound
term of a “lion-leopard,” or a “lion-leopardé.” But that controversy
has long been at rest.

The following terms are now in use to denote the various attitudes
of the Lion in Heraldry:--

Rampant: erect, one hind paw on the ground,
the other three paws elevated, the animal looking forward and having
his tail elevated, No. 171.

Rampant Guardant: as before, but looking out from the Shield, No. 172. Rampant Reguardant: as before,
but looking backwards.

Passant: walking, three paws on the ground, the dexter fore-paw being
elevated, looking forward, the tail displayed over the back, No. 173.

Passant Guardant: as before, but looking out from the Shield, No. 174. Passant Reguardant: as
before, but looking backwards.

Statant: standing, his four paws on the ground, and looking before him, No. 175. Statant Guardant:
as before, but looking out from the Shield, No. 176: in this example the Lion has his tail extended,
but this would be specified in the blazon, as it is an unusual position. In like manner, if the tail
of a Lion in any other attitude be extended, there must be a statement
to that effect.

Sejant: sitting down with his head elevated, No. 178.

If he looks out from the Shield, the word Guardant is to be added. A Scottish Lion sejant usually
has his fore paws raised in the air, and in English terms of blazon would be described as “Sejant
erect” or “Sejant rampant.”

Couchant: is at rest, the fore legs stretched on the ground, as No. 177.

Dormant: asleep, head resting on fore paws, No. 179.

Salient: in the act of springing, the hind paws on the ground, both the fore paws elevated, No.
180.

Queue fourchée: having a forked tail.

Double-queued: two tails, as No. 181, which is a lion rampant double-queued.

Coward: passant reguardant, his tail between his legs, No. 182.

Two Lions rampant, when face to face, are Counter rampant, or Combatant:
when back to back, they are Addorsed: when passant or salient in contrary
directions, they are Counter passant or Counter salient.

Lions, whatever their tincture, except it be red, or they are charged
on a field of that tincture, are armed and langued gules; but azure
in the case of either of these exceptions, unless the contrary be
specified in the blazon. From somewhere
amidships the silence was broken by a low whimpering from the cabin boy.

"Oh, shut up!" Captain Davenport yelled suddenly and with such force as to startle every man
on board and to frighten the offender into a wild wail of terror.

"Mr. Konig," the captain said in a voice that trembled with rage and nerves, "will you kindly
step for'ard and stop that brat's mouth with a deck mop?"

But it was McCoy who went forward, and in a few minutes had the boy comforted and asleep.

Shortly before daybreak the first breath of air began to move from out the southeast, increasing
swiftly to a stiff and stiffer breeze. All hands were on deck waiting for what might be behind
it. "We're all right now, Captain," said McCoy, standing close to his shoulder. "The hurricane
is to the west'ard, and we are south of it. This breeze is the in-suck. It won't blow any harder.
You can begin to put sail on her."

"But what's the good? Where shall I sail? This is the second day without observations, and
we should have sighted Hao Island yesterday morning. Which way does it bear, north, south,
east, or what? Tell me that, and I'll make sail in a jiffy."

"I am no navigator, Captain," McCoy said in his mild way.

"I used to think I was one," was the retort, "before I got into these Paumotus."

At midday the cry of "Breakers ahead!" was heard from the lookout. The Pyrenees was kept off,
and sail after sail was loosed and sheeted home. The Pyrenees was sliding through the water
and fighting a current that threatened to set her down upon the breakers. Officers and men
were working like mad, cook and cabin boy, Captain Davenport himself, and McCoy all lending
a hand. It was a close shave. It was a low shoal, a bleak and perilous place over which the
seas broke unceasingly, where no man could live, and on which not even sea birds could rest.
The PYRENEES was swept within a hundred yards of it before the wind carried her clear, and
at this moment the panting crew, its work done, burst out in a torrent of curses upon the head
of McCoy--of McCoy who had come on board, and proposed the run to Mangareva, and lured them
all away from the safety of Pitcairn Island to certain destruction in this baffling and terrible
stretch of sea. But McCoy's tranquil soul was undisturbed. He smiled at them with simple and
gracious benevolence, and, somehow, the exalted goodness of him seemed to penetrate to their
dark and somber souls, shaming them, and from very shame stilling the curses vibrating in their
throats.

"Bad waters! Bad waters!" Captain Davenport was murmuring as his ship forged clear; but he
broke off abruptly to gaze at the shoal which should have been dead astern, but which was already
on the PYRENEES' weather-quarter and working up rapidly to windward.

He sat down and buried his face in his hands. And the first mate saw, and McCoy saw, and the
crew saw, what he had seen. South of the shoal an easterly current had set them down upon it;
north of the shoal an equally swift westerly current had clutched the ship and was sweeping
her away.

"I've heard of these Paumotus before," the captain groaned, lifting his blanched face from
his hands. "Captain Moyendale told me about them after losing his ship on them. And I laughed
at him behind his back. God forgive me, I laughed at him. What shoal is that?" he broke off,
to ask McCoy.

"I don't know, Captain."

"Why don't you know?"

"Because I never saw it before, and because I have never heard of it. I do know that it is
not charted. These waters have never been thoroughly surveyed."

"Then you don't know where we are?"

"No more than you do," McCoy said gently.

At four in the afternoon cocoanut trees were sighted, apparently growing out of the water.
A little later the low land of an atoll was raised above the sea.

"I know where we are now, Captain." McCoy lowered the glasses from his eyes. "That's Resolution
Island. We are forty miles beyond Hao Island, and the wind is in our teeth."

"Get ready to beach her then. Where's the entrance?"

"There's only a canoe passage. But now that we know where we are, we can run for Barclay de
Tolley. It is only one hundred and twenty miles from here, due nor'-nor'west. With this breeze
we can be there by nine o'clock tomorrow morning."

Captain Davenport consulted the chart and debated with himself.

"If we wreck her here," McCoy added, "we'd have to make the run to Barclay de Tolley in the
boats just the same."

The captain gave his orders, and once more the Pyrenees swung off for another run across the
inhospitable sea.

And the middle of the next afternoon saw despair and mutiny on her smoking deck. The current
had accelerated, the wind had slackened, and the Pyrenees had sagged off to the west. The lookout
sighted Barclay de Tolley to the eastward, barely visible from the masthead, and vainly and
for hours the PYRENEES tried to beat up to it. Ever, like a mirage, the cocoanut trees hovered
on the horizon, visible only from the masthead. From the deck they were hidden by the bulge
of the world.

Again Captain Davenport consulted McCoy and the chart. Makemo lay seventy-five miles to the
southwest. Its lagoon was thirty miles long, and its entrance was excellent. When Captain Davenport
gave his orders, the crew refused duty. They announced that they had had enough of hell fire
under their feet. There was the land. What if the ship could not make it? They could make it
in the boats. Let her burn, then. Their lives amounted to something to them. They had served
faithfully the ship, now they were going to serve themselves.

They sprang to the boats, brushing the second and third mates out of the way, and proceeded
to swing the boats out and to prepare to lower away. Captain Davenport and the first mate,
revolvers in hand, were advancing to the break of the poop, when McCoy, who had climbed on
top of the cabin, began to speak.

He spoke to the sailors, and at the first sound of his dovelike, cooing voice they paused to
hear. He extended to them his own ineffable serenity and peace. His soft voice and simple thoughts
flowed out to them in a magic stream, soothing them against their wills. Long forgotten things
came back to them, and some remembered lullaby songs of childhood and the content and rest
of the mother's arm at the end of the day. There was no more trouble, no more danger, no more
irk, in all the world. Everything was as it should be, and it was only a matter of course that
they should turn their backs upon the land and put to sea once more with hell fire hot beneath
their feet.

McCoy spoke simply; but it was not what he spoke. It was his personality that spoke more eloquently
than any word he could utter. It was an alchemy of soul occultly subtile and profoundly deep--a
mysterious emanation of the spirit, seductive, sweetly humble, and terribly imperious. It was
illumination in the dark crypts of their souls, a compulsion of purity and gentleness vastly
greater than that which resided in the shining, death-spitting revolvers of the officers.

The men wavered reluctantly where they stood, and those who had loosed the turns made them
fast again. Then one, and then another, and then all of them, began to sidle awkwardly away.

McCoy's face was beaming with childlike pleasure as he descended from the top of the cabin.
There was no trouble. For that matter there had been no trouble averted. The inscription is commenced
on the Seal, No. 446, and continued on the Counter-Seal, No. 447,
and is as follows:-- S : THOE : COMITIS : WARRWYCHIE : ANNO : REGNI
: REGIS : E : T’CII : POST : CŌQVESTV̄ : ANGLIE : SEPTIO : DECIO :
ET : REGNI : SVI : FRANCIE : QVARTO-- “The Seal of Thomas, Earl of
Warwick, in the seventeenth year of the reign of King Edward III.

(of that name) after the Conquest of England, and the fourth of his
reign over France.” Thus, the date of the execution of this fine Seal
is the year 1344.

The Earl himself died in 1369.

A second Beauchamp Seal is also represented in the Frontispiece. This is the Seal of RICHARD DE
BEAUCHAMP, K.G., fifth Earl of WARWICK, who died in the year 1439. The Heraldry in this example
is particularly interesting.

The Shield, charged with Newburgh and Beauchamp quarterly, is couchée from the helm of the Earl
which is ensigned with his coronet and crest; and on either side is a bear with a ragged staff,
the famous Badges of the BEAUCHAMPS: No. 448 (see Frontispiece). The Inscription is-- SIGILL
: RIC : DE : BELLO : CAMPO : COMIT : WARWICH-- “The Seal of Richard de Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick”
(see pages 223 and 224).

III. In GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE Heraldry is always a consistent, beautiful,
and most effective accessory.

Indeed, so thoroughly is the spirit of Heraldry in harmony with the great Architecture which
grew up in the Middle Ages, that Heraldry must be considered rather as an element of its nature
than as an allied Art. Gothic Architecture is essentially heraldic; and hence, as well as from
its elastic nature and its equally consistent and happy applicability to every use and requirement,
it is peculiarly appropriate as our own national style.

From the earliest years of its existence as a definite Science, Heraldry is found to be most
intimately associated with the Gothic Architecture of England: and happy it was for the early
Heralds, that in their days the English Gothic was at work in the full strength of its first maturity.
And this alliance was never interrupted, or permitted to decline from its original cordiality.
As long as the Gothic flourished, Heraldry held its own place in
Architecture.

And in the finest works that exist amongst us, relics of the grand Gothic Ages of English Architecture,
Heraldry is ever present to adorn them with its graphic records. In the spandrels of arcades,
in panels, upon bosses in vaulting, in stained glass, in encaustic floor-tiles, and indeed in almost
every position in which such ornamentation could be admissible, the early Herald is found to have
been the fellow-worker with the early Gothic architect. Gothic Architecture, accordingly, has preserved
for us very noble collections and specimens of the most valuable illustrations of our national
Heraldry.

Canterbury and York Cathedrals, and the Abbey Churches of Westminster
and St. Alban’s, with the Chapel of King’s College, Cambridge, are
especially rich in heraldic treasures: and Westminster Hall and the
northern Castles of Alnwick and Warkworth may be specified as noble
examples of secular Architecture, which retain their heraldic enrichments.


He made a still and manufactured alcohol from the roots of the ti-plant. Quintal was his chum,
and they got drunk together all the time. At last McCoy got delirium tremens, tied a rock to
his neck, and jumped into the sea.

"Quintal's wife, the one whose ear he bit off, also got killed by falling from the cliffs.
Then Quintal went to Young and demanded his wife, and went to Adams and demanded his wife.
Adams and Young were afraid of Quintal. They knew he would kill them. So they killed him, the
two of them together, with a hatchet. Then Young died. And that was about all the trouble they
had."

"I should say so," Captain Davenport snorted. "There was nobody left to kill."

"You see, God had hidden His face," McCoy said.

By morning no more than a faint air was blowing from the eastward, and, unable to make appreciable
southing by it, Captain Davenport hauled up full-and-by on the port track. He was afraid of
that terrible westerly current which had cheated him out of so many ports of refuge. All day
the calm continued, and all night, while the sailors, on a short ration of dried banana, were
grumbling. Also, they were growing weak and complaining of stomach pains caused by the straight
banana diet. All day the current swept the PYRENEES to the westward, while there was no wind
to bear her south. In the middle of the first dogwatch, cocoanut trees were sighted due south,
their tufted heads rising above the water and marking the low-lying atoll beneath.

"That is Taenga Island," McCoy said. "We need a breeze tonight, or else we'll miss Makemo."

"What's become of the southeast trade?" the captain demanded. "Why don't it blow? What's the
matter?"

"It is the evaporation from the big lagoons--there are so many of them," McCoy explained. "The
evaporation upsets the whole system of trades. It even causes the wind to back up and blow
gales from the southwest. This is the Dangerous Archipelago, Captain."

Captain Davenport faced the old man, opened his mouth, and was about to curse, but paused and
refrained. McCoy's presence was a rebuke to the blasphemies that stirred in his brain and trembled
in his larynx. McCoy's influence had been growing during the many days they had been together.
Captain Davenport was an autocrat of the sea, fearing no man, never bridling his tongue, and
now he found himself unable to curse in the presence of this old man with the feminine brown
eyes and the voice of a dove. When he realized this, Captain Davenport experienced a distinct
shock. This old man was merely the seed of McCoy, of McCoy of the BOUNTY, the mutineer fleeing
from the hemp that waited him in England, the McCoy who was a power for evil in the early days
of blood and lust and violent death on Pitcairn Island.

Captain Davenport was not religious, yet in that moment he felt a mad impulse to cast himself
at the other's feet--and to say he knew not what. It was an emotion that so deeply stirred
him, rather than a coherent thought, and he was aware in some vague way of his own unworthiness
and smallness in the presence of this other man who possessed the simplicity of a child and
the gentleness of a woman.

Of course he could not so humble himself before the eyes of his officers and men. And yet the
anger that had prompted the blasphemy still raged in him. He suddenly smote the cabin with
his clenched hand and cried:

"Look here, old man, I won't be beaten. These Paumotus have cheated and tricked me and made
a fool of me. I refuse to be beaten. I am going to drive this ship, and drive and drive and
drive clear through the Paumotus to China but what I find a bed for her. If every man deserts,
I'll stay by her. I'll show the Paumotus. They can't fool me. She's a good girl, and I'll stick
by her as long as there's a plank to stand on. You hear me?"

"And I'll stay with you, Captain," McCoy said.

During the night, light, baffling airs blew out of the south, and the frantic captain, with
his cargo of fire, watched and measured his westward drift and went off by himself at times
to curse softly so that McCoy should not hear.

Daylight showed more palms growing out of the water to the south.

"That's the leeward point of Makemo," McCoy said. "Katiu is only a few miles to the west. We
may make that."

But the current, sucking between the two islands, swept them to the northwest, and at one in
the afternoon they saw the palms of Katiu rise above the sea and sink back into the sea again.

A few minutes later, just as the captain had discovered that a new current from the northeast
had gripped the Pyrenees, the masthead lookouts raised cocoanut palms in the northwest.

"It is Raraka," said McCoy. "We won't make it without wind. The current is drawing us down
to the southwest. But we must watch out. A few miles farther on a current flows north and turns
in a circle to the northwest. This will sweep us away from Fakarava, and Fakarava is the place
for the Pyrenees to find her bed."

"They can sweep all they da--all they well please," Captain Davenport remarked with heat. "We'll
find a bed for her somewhere just the same."

But the situation on the Pyrenees was reaching a culmination. The deck was so hot that it seemed
an increase of a few degrees would cause it to burst into flames. In many places even the heavy-soled
shoes of the men were no protection, and they were compelled to step lively to avoid scorching
their feet. The smoke had increased and grown more acrid. Every man on board was suffering
from inflamed eyes, and they coughed and strangled like a crew of tuberculosis patients. In
the afternoon the boats were swung out and equipped. The last several packages of dried bananas
were stored in them, as well as the instruments of the officers. Captain Davenport even put
the chronometer into the longboat, fearing the blowing up of the deck at any moment.

All night this apprehension weighed heavily on all, and in the first morning light, with hollow
eyes and ghastly faces, they stared at one another as if in surprise that the Pyrenees still
held together and that they still were alive.

Walking rapidly at times, and even occasionally breaking into an undignified hop-skip-and-run,
Captain Davenport inspected his ship's deck.

"It is a matter of hours now, if not of minutes," he announced on his return to the poop.

The cry of land came down from the masthead. From the deck the land was invisible, and McCoy
went aloft, while the captain took advantage of the opportunity to curse some of the bitterness
out of his heart. But the cursing was suddenly stopped by a dark line on the water which he
sighted to the northeast. It was not a squall, but a regular breeze--the disrupted trade wind,
eight points out of its direction but resuming business once more.

"Hold her up, Captain," McCoy said as soon as he reached the poop. "That's the easterly point
of Fakarava, and we'll go in through the passage full-tilt, the wind abeam, and every sail
drawing."

At the end of an hour, the cocoanut trees and the low-lying land were visible from the deck.
The feeling that the end of the PYRENEES' resistance was imminent weighed heavily on everybody.
Captain Davenport had the three boats lowered and dropped short astern, a man in each to keep
them apart. The Pyrenees closely skirted the shore, the surf-whitened atoll a bare two cable
lengths away.

And a minute later the land parted, exposing a narrow passage and the lagoon beyond, a great
mirror, thirty miles in length and a third as broad.

"Now, Captain."

For the last time the yards of the Pyrenees swung around as she obeyed the wheel and headed
into the passage. The turns had scarcely been made, and nothing had been coiled down, when
the men and mates swept back to the poop in panic terror. Nothing had happened, yet they averred
that something was going to happen. They could not tell why. They merely knew that it was about
to happen. McCoy started forward to take up his position on the bow in order to con the vessel
in; but the captain gripped his arm and whirled him around.

"Do it from here," he said. "That deck's not safe. What's the matter?" he demanded the next
instant. "We're standing still."

McCoy smiled.

"You are bucking a seven-knot current, Captain," he said. "That is the way the full ebb runs
out of this passage."

At the end of another hour the Pyrenees had scarcely gained her length, but the wind freshened
and she began to forge ahead.

"Better get into the boats, some of you," Captain Davenport commanded.

His voice was still ringing, and the men were just beginning to move in obedience, when the
amidship deck of the Pyrenees, in a mass of flame and smoke, was flung upward into the sails
and rigging, part of it remaining there and the rest falling into the sea. The wind being abeam,
was what had saved the men crowded aft. They made a blind rush to gain the boats, but McCoy's
voice, carrying its convincing message of vast calm and endless time, stopped them.

"Take it easy," he was saying. "Everything is all right. Pass that boy down somebody, please."

The man at the wheel had forsaken it in a funk, and Captain Davenport had leaped and caught
the spokes in time to prevent the ship from yawing in the current and going ashore.

"Better take charge of the boats," he said to Mr. Konig. "Tow one of them short, right under
the quarter.... When I go over, it'll be on the jump."

Mr. Konig hesitated, then went over the rail and lowered himself into the boat.

"Keep her off half a point, Captain."

Captain Davenport gave a start. He had thought he had the ship to himself.

"Ay, ay; half a point it is," he answered.

Amidships the Pyrenees was an open flaming furnace, out of which poured an immense volume of
smoke which rose high above the masts and completely hid the forward part of the ship. McCoy,
in the shelter of the mizzen-shrouds, continued his difficult task of conning the ship through
the intricate channel. The fire was working aft along the deck from the seat of explosion,
while the soaring tower of canvas on the mainmast went up and vanished in a sheet of flame.
Forward, though they could not see them, they knew that the head-sails were still drawing.

"If only she don't burn all her canvas off before she makes inside," the captain groaned.

"She'll make it," McCoy assured him with supreme confidence. "There is plenty of time. She
is bound to make it. At the same time, in the earliest examples of charged Labels, the repetitions
of the Charges, while devoid of any special differencing aim or meaning,
may be considered to have been suggested by the sources from which
the Charges themselves were derived.

For example: the Label of Lancaster, No. 338, of Earl EDMOND, derived directly from the Shield
of France ancient, No. 247, with its field semée de lys, has three fleurs de lys upon each point,
so that this Label has the appearance of being also semée de lys.


"Keep her west-nor-west."

Captain Davenport put the wheel up and steadied her.

"West by north, Captain."

"West by north she is."

"And now west."

Slowly, point by point, as she entered the lagoon, the PYRENEES described the circle that put
her before the wind; and point by point, with all the calm certitude of a thousand years of
time to spare, McCoy chanted the changing course.

"Another point, Captain."

"A point it is."

Captain Davenport whirled several spokes over, suddenly reversing and coming back one to check her.

"Steady."

"Steady she is--right on it."

Despite the fact that the wind was now astern, the heat was so intense that Captain Davenport
was compelled to steal sidelong glances into the binnacle, letting go the wheel now with one
hand, now with the other, to rub or shield his blistering cheeks.

McCoy's beard was crinkling and shriveling and the smell of it, strong in the other's nostrils,
compelled him to look toward McCoy with sudden solicitude. Captain Davenport was letting go
the spokes alternately with his hands in order to rub their blistering backs against his trousers.
Every sail on the mizzenmast vanished in a rush of flame, compelling the two men to crouch
and shield their faces.

"Now," said McCoy, stealing a glance ahead at the low shore, "four points up, Captain, and
let her drive."

Shreds and patches of burning rope and canvas were falling about them and upon them. The tarry
smoke from a smouldering piece of rope at the captain's feet set him off into a violent coughing
fit, during which he still clung to the spokes.

The Pyrenees struck, her bow lifted and she ground ahead gently to a stop. A shower of burning
fragments, dislodged by the shock, fell about them. The ship moved ahead again and struck a
second time. At the period of the Conquest, and whilst the Norman dynasty was on
the throne, there were a number of people who bore this title.

At that time and for long afterwards, certainly well into the Plantagenet
period, an Earl within his earldom was little short of a petty sovereign.

Issues of justice and many other rights of regality were in his hands,
and he occupied a position very much akin to a viceroy for the King,
seeing that what he did he did in his own name and as Earl, or “comes,”
of the County.

 He reached the painter
of the boat that lay under the quarter, then looked for McCoy, who was standing aside to let
him go down.

"You first," the captain cried, gripping him by the shoulder and almost throwing him over the
rail. But the flame and smoke were too terrible, and he followed hard after McCoy, both men
wriggling on the rope and sliding down into the boat together. A sailor in the bow, without
waiting for orders, slashed the painter through with his sheath knife. The oars, poised in
readiness, bit into the water, and the boat shot away.

"A beautiful bed, Captain," McCoy murmured, looking back.

"Ay, a beautiful bed, and all thanks to you," was the answer.

The three boats pulled away for the white beach of pounded coral, beyond which, on the edge
of a cocoanut grove, could be seen a half dozen grass houses and a score or more of excited
natives, gazing wide-eyed at the conflagration that had come to land.

The boats grounded and they stepped out on the white beach.

"And now," said McCoy, "I must see about getting back to Pitcairn."

