      "He then said, 'Move on in my good way and--.' He could proceed no
      further.  The foreigner, Mr. Young, embraced and kissed him.
      Hoapili also embraced him, whispering something in his ear, after
      which he was taken back to the house.  About twelve he was carried
      once more to the house for eating, into which his head entered,
      while his body was in the dwelling house immediately adjoining.  It
      should be remarked that this frequent carrying of a sick chief from
      one house to another resulted from the tabu system, then in force.
      There were at that time six houses (huts) connected with an
      establishment--one was for worship, one for the men to eat in, an
      eating house for the women, a house to sleep in, a house in which to
      manufacture kapa (native cloth) and one where, at certain intervals,
      the women might dwell in seclusion.

      "The sick was once more taken to his house, when he expired; this
      was at two o'clock, a circumstance from which Leleiohoku derived his
      name.  As he breathed his last, Kalaimoku came to the eating house
      to order those in it to go out.  There were two aged persons thus
      directed to depart; one went, the other remained on account of love
      to the King, by whom he had formerly been kindly sustained.  The
      children also were sent away.  Then Kalaimoku came to the house, and
      the chiefs had a consultation.  One of them spoke thus: 'This is my
      thought--we will eat him raw. [This sounds suspicious, in view of
      the fact that all Sandwich Island historians, white and black,
      protest that cannibalism never existed in the islands.  However,
      since they only proposed to "eat him raw" we "won't count that".
      But it would certainly have been cannibalism if they had cooked
      him.--M.  T.]  Kaahumanu (one of the dead King's widows) replied,
      'Perhaps his body is not at our disposal; that is more properly with
      his successor.  Our part in him--his breath--has departed; his
      remains will be disposed of by Liholiho.'

      "After this conversation the body was taken into the consecrated
      house for the performance of the proper rites by the priest and the
      new King.  The name of this ceremony is uko; and when the sacred hog
      was baked the priest offered it to the dead body, and it became a
      god, the King at the same time repeating the customary prayers.

      "Then the priest, addressing himself to the King and chiefs, said:
      'I will now make known to you the rules to be observed respecting
      persons to be sacrificed on the burial of this body.  If you obtain
      one man before the corpse is removed, one will be sufficient; but
      after it leaves this house four will be required.  If delayed until
      we carry the corpse to the grave there must be ten; but after it is
      deposited in the grave there must be fifteen.  To-morrow morning
      there will be a tabu, and, if the sacrifice be delayed until that
      time, forty men must die.'

      "Then the high priest, Hewahewa, inquired of the chiefs, 'Where
      shall be the residence of King Liholiho?'  They replied, 'Where,
      indeed?  You, of all men, ought to know.'  Then the priest observed,
      'There are two suitable places; one is Kau, the other is Kohala.'
      The chiefs preferred the latter, as it was more thickly inhabited.
      The priest added, 'These are proper places for the King's residence;
      but he must not remain in Kona, for it is polluted.'  This was
      agreed to.  It was now break of day.  As he was being carried to the
      place of burial the people perceived that their King was dead, and
      they wailed.  When the corpse was removed from the house to the
      tomb, a distance of one chain, the procession was met by a certain
      man who was ardently attached to the deceased.  He leaped upon the
      chiefs who were carrying the King's body; he desired to die with him
      on account of his love.  The chiefs drove him away.  He persisted in
      making numerous attempts, which were unavailing.  Kalaimoka also had
      it in his heart to die with him, but was prevented by Hookio.

      "The morning following Kamehameha's death, Liholiho and his train
      departed for Kohala, according to the suggestions of the priest, to
      avoid the defilement occasioned by the dead.  At this time if a
      chief died the land was polluted, and the heirs sought a residence
      in another part of the country until the corpse was dissected and
      the bones tied in a bundle, which being done, the season of
      defilement terminated.  If the deceased were not a chief, the house
      only was defiled which became pure again on the burial of the body.
      Such were the laws on this subject.

      "On the morning on which Liholiho sailed in his canoe for Kohala,
      the chiefs and people mourned after their manner on occasion of a
      chief's death, conducting themselves like madmen and like beasts.
      Their conduct was such as to forbid description; The priests, also,
      put into action the sorcery apparatus, that the person who had
      prayed the King to death might die; for it was not believed that
      Kamehameha's departure was the effect either of sickness or old age.
      When the sorcerers set up by their fire-places sticks with a strip
      of kapa flying at the top, the chief Keeaumoku, Kaahumaun's brother,
      came in a state of intoxication and broke the flag-staff of the
      sorcerers, from which it was inferred that Kaahumanu and her friends
      had been instrumental in the King's death.  On this account they
      were subjected to abuse."

You have the contrast, now, and a strange one it is.  This great Queen, Kaahumanu, who was
"subjected to abuse" during the frightful orgies that followed the King's death, in accordance
with ancient custom, afterward became a devout Christian and a steadfast and powerful friend
of the missionaries.

Dogs were, and still are, reared and fattened for food, by the natives --hence the reference
to their value in one of the above paragraphs.

Forty years ago it was the custom in the Islands to suspend all law for a certain number of
days after the death of a royal personage; and then a saturnalia ensued which one may picture
to himself after a fashion, but not in the full horror of the reality.  The people shaved their
heads, knocked out a tooth or two, plucked out an eye sometimes, cut, bruised, mutilated or
burned their flesh, got drunk, burned each other's huts, maimed or murdered one another according
to the caprice of the moment, and both sexes gave themselves up to brutal and unbridled licentiousness.

And after it all, came a torpor from which the nation slowly emerged bewildered and dazed,
as if from a hideous half-remembered nightmare. They were not the salt of the earth, those
"gentle children of the sun."

The natives still keep up an old custom of theirs which cannot be comforting to an invalid.
When they think a sick friend is going to die, a couple of dozen neighbors surround his hut
and keep up a deafening wailing night and day till he either dies or gets well.  No doubt this
arrangement has helped many a subject to a shroud before his appointed time.

They surround a hut and wail in the same heart-broken way when its occupant returns from a
journey.  This is their dismal idea of a welcome. A very little of it would go a great way
with most of us.

CHAPTER LXIX.

Bound for Hawaii (a hundred and fifty miles distant,) to visit the great volcano and behold
the other notable things which distinguish that island above the remainder of the group, we
sailed from Honolulu on a certain Saturday afternoon, in the good schooner Boomerang.

The Boomerang was about as long as two street cars, and about as wide as one.  She was so small
(though she was larger than the majority of the inter-island coasters) that when I stood on
her deck I felt but little smaller than the Colossus of Rhodes must have felt when he had a
man-of-war under him.  I could reach the water when she lay over under a strong breeze.  When
the Captain and my comrade (a Mr. Billings), myself and four other persons were all assembled
on the little after portion of the deck which is sacred to the cabin passengers, it was full--there
was not room for any more quality folks.  Another section of the deck, twice as large as ours,
was full of natives of both sexes, with their customary dogs, mats, blankets, pipes, calabashes
of poi, fleas, and other luxuries and baggage of minor importance.  As soon as we set sail
the natives all lay down on the deck as thick as negroes in a slave-pen, and smoked, conversed,
and spit on each other, and were truly sociable.

The little low-ceiled cabin below was rather larger than a hearse, and as dark as a vault.
It had two coffins on each side--I mean two bunks. A small table, capable of accommodating
three persons at dinner, stood against the forward bulkhead, and over it hung the dingiest
whale oil lantern that ever peopled the obscurity of a dungeon with ghostly shapes. The floor
room unoccupied was not extensive.  One might swing a cat in it, perhaps, but not a long cat.
The hold forward of the bulkhead had but little freight in it, and from morning till night
a portly old rooster, with a voice like Baalam's ass, and the same disposition to use it, strutted
up and down in that part of the vessel and crowed.  He usually took dinner at six o'clock,
and then, after an hour devoted to meditation, he mounted a barrel and crowed a good part of
the night. He got hoarser all the time, but he scorned to allow any personal consideration
to interfere with his duty, and kept up his labors in defiance of threatened diphtheria.

Sleeping was out of the question when he was on watch.  He was a source of genuine aggravation
and annoyance.  It was worse than useless to shout at him or apply offensive epithets to him--he
only took these things for applause, and strained himself to make more noise.  Occasionally,
during the day, I threw potatoes at him through an aperture in the bulkhead, but he only dodged
and went on crowing.

The first night, as I lay in my coffin, idly watching the dim lamp swinging to the rolling
of the ship, and snuffing the nauseous odors of bilge water, I felt something gallop over me.
I turned out promptly. However, I turned in again when I found it was only a rat.  Presently
something galloped over me once more.  I knew it was not a rat this time, and I thought it
might be a centipede, because the Captain had killed one on deck in the afternoon.  I turned
out.  The first glance at the pillow showed me repulsive sentinel perched upon each end of
it--cockroaches as large as peach leaves--fellows with long, quivering antennae and fiery,
malignant eyes.  They were grating their teeth like tobacco worms, and appeared to be dissatisfied
about something.  I had often heard that these reptiles were in the habit of eating off sleeping
sailors' toe nails down to the quick, and I would not get in the bunk any more.  I lay down
on the floor.  But a rat came and bothered me, and shortly afterward a procession of cockroaches
arrived and camped in my hair.  In a few moments the rooster was crowing with uncommon spirit
and a party of fleas were throwing double somersaults about my person in the wildest disorder,
and taking a bite every time they struck.  I was beginning to feel really annoyed.  I got up
and put my clothes on and went on deck.

The above is not overdrawn; it is a truthful sketch of inter-island schooner life.  There is
no such thing as keeping a vessel in elegant condition, when she carries molasses and Kanakas.

It was compensation for my sufferings to come unexpectedly upon so beautiful a scene as met
my eye--to step suddenly out of the sepulchral gloom of the cabin and stand under the strong
light of the moon--in the centre, as it were, of a glittering sea of liquid silver--to see
the broad sails straining in the gale, the ship heeled over on her side, the angry foam hissing
past her lee bulwarks, and sparkling sheets of spray dashing high over her bows and raining
upon her decks; to brace myself and hang fast to the first object that presented itself, with
hat jammed down and coat tails whipping in the breeze, and feel that exhilaration that thrills
in one's hair and quivers down his back bone when he knows that every inch of canvas is drawing
and the vessel cleaving through the waves at her utmost speed.  There was no darkness, no dimness,
no obscurity there.  All was brightness, every object was vividly defined. Every prostrate
Kanaka; every coil of rope; every calabash of poi; every puppy; every seam in the flooring;
every bolthead; every object; however minute, showed sharp and distinct in its every outline;
and the shadow of the broad mainsail lay black as a pall upon the deck, leaving Billings's
white upturned face glorified and his body in a total eclipse. Monday morning we were close
to the island of Hawaii.  Two of its high mountains were in view--Mauna Loa and Hualaiai.

The latter is an imposing peak, but being only ten thousand feet high is seldom mentioned or
heard of.  Mauna Loa is said to be sixteen thousand feet high.  The rays of glittering snow
and ice, that clasped its summit like a claw, looked refreshing when viewed from the blistering
climate we were in.  One could stand on that mountain (wrapped up in blankets and furs to keep
warm), and while he nibbled a snowball or an icicle to quench his thirst he could look down
the long sweep of its sides and see spots where plants are growing that grow only where the
bitter cold of Winter prevails; lower down he could see sections devoted to production that
thrive in the temperate zone alone; and at the bottom of the mountain he could see the home
of the tufted cocoa-palms and other species of vegetation that grow only in the sultry atmosphere
of eternal Summer.  He could see all the climes of the world at a single glance of the eye,
and that glance would only pass over a distance of four or five miles as the bird flies!

By and by we took boat and went ashore at Kailua, designing to ride horseback through the pleasant
orange and coffee region of Kona, and rejoin the vessel at a point some leagues distant.  This
journey is well worth taking.  The trail passes along on high ground--say a thousand feet above
sea level--and usually about a mile distant from the ocean, which is always in sight, save
that occasionally you find yourself buried in the forest in the midst of a rank tropical vegetation
and a dense growth of trees, whose great bows overarch the road and shut out sun and sea and
everything, and leave you in a dim, shady tunnel, haunted with invisible singing birds and
fragrant with the odor of flowers.  It was pleasant to ride occasionally in the warm sun, and
feast the eye upon the ever-changing panorama of the forest (beyond and below us), with its
many tints, its softened lights and shadows, its billowy undulations sweeping gently down from
the mountain to the sea.  It was pleasant also, at intervals, to leave the sultry sun and pass
into the cool, green depths of this forest and indulge in sentimental reflections under the
inspiration of its brooding twilight and its whispering foliage. We rode through one orange
grove that had ten thousand tree in it! They were all laden with fruit.

At one farmhouse we got some large peaches of excellent flavor. This fruit, as a general thing,
does not do well in the Sandwich Islands. It takes a sort of almond shape, and is small and
bitter.  It needs frost, they say, and perhaps it does; if this be so, it will have a good
opportunity to go on needing it, as it will not be likely to get it. The trees from which the
fine fruit I have spoken of, came, had been planted and replanted sixteen times, and to this
treatment the proprietor of the orchard attributed his-success.

We passed several sugar plantations--new ones and not very extensive. The crops were, in most
cases, third rattoons.  [NOTE.--The first crop is called "plant cane;" subsequent crops which
spring from the original roots, without replanting, are called "rattoons."] Almost everywhere
on the island of Hawaii sugar-cane matures in twelve months, both rattoons and plant, and although
it ought to be taken off as soon as it tassels, no doubt, it is not absolutely necessary to
do it until about four months afterward.  In Kona, the average yield of an acre of ground is
two tons of sugar, they say.  This is only a moderate yield for these islands, but would be
astounding for Louisiana and most other sugar growing countries. The plantations in Kona being
on pretty high ground--up among the light and frequent rains--no irrigation whatever is required.

CHAPTER LXX.

We stopped some time at one of the plantations, to rest ourselves and refresh the horses. 
We had a chatty conversation with several gentlemen present; but there was one person, a middle
aged man, with an absent look in his face, who simply glanced up, gave us good-day and lapsed
again into the meditations which our coming had interrupted.  The planters whispered us not
to mind him--crazy.  They said he was in the Islands for his health; was a preacher; his home,
Michigan.  They said that if he woke up presently and fell to talking about a correspondence
which he had some time held with Mr. Greeley about a trifle of some kind, we must humor him
and listen with interest; and we must humor his fancy that this correspondence was the talk
of the world.

It was easy to see that he was a gentle creature and that his madness had nothing vicious in
it.  He looked pale, and a little worn, as if with perplexing thought and anxiety of mind.
He sat a long time, looking at the floor, and at intervals muttering to himself and nodding
his head acquiescingly or shaking it in mild protest.  He was lost in his thought, or in his
memories.  We continued our talk with the planters, branching from subject to subject.  But
at last the word "circumstance," casually dropped, in the course of conversation, attracted
his attention and brought an eager look into his countenance.  He faced about in his chair
and said:

"Circumstance?  What circumstance?  Ah, I know--I know too well.  So you have heard of it too."
[With a sigh.] "Well, no matter--all the world has heard of it.  All the world.  The whole
world.  It is a large world, too, for a thing to travel so far in--now isn't it?  Yes, yes--the
Greeley correspondence with Erickson has created the saddest and bitterest controversy on both
sides of the ocean--and still they keep it up!  It makes us famous, but at what a sorrowful
sacrifice!  I was so sorry when I heard that it had caused that bloody and distressful war
over there in Italy.  It was little comfort to me, after so much bloodshed, to know that the
victors sided with me, and the vanquished with Greeley.--It is little comfort to know that
Horace Greeley is responsible for the battle of Sadowa, and not me.

"Queen Victoria wrote me that she felt just as I did about it--she said that as much as she
was opposed to Greeley and the spirit he showed in the correspondence with me, she would not
have had Sadowa happen for hundreds of dollars.  I can show you her letter, if you would like
to see it.  But gentlemen, much as you may think you know about that unhappy correspondence,
you cannot know the straight of it till you hear it from my lips.  It has always been garbled
in the journals, and even in history.  Yes, even in history--think of it!  Let me--please let
me, give you the matter, exactly as it occurred.  I truly will not abuse your confidence."

Then he leaned forward, all interest, all earnestness, and told his story--and told it appealingly,
too, and yet in the simplest and most unpretentious way; indeed, in such a way as to suggest
to one, all the time, that this was a faithful, honorable witness, giving evidence in the sacred
interest of justice, and under oath.  He said:

"Mrs. Beazeley--Mrs. Jackson Beazeley, widow, of the village of Campbellton, Kansas,--wrote
me about a matter which was near her heart --a matter which many might think trivial, but to
her it was a thing of deep concern.  I was living in Michigan, then--serving in the ministry.
She was, and is, an estimable woman--a woman to whom poverty and hardship have proven incentives
to industry, in place of discouragements. Her only treasure was her son William, a youth just
verging upon manhood; religious, amiable, and sincerely attached to agriculture.  He was the
widow's comfort and her pride.  And so, moved by her love for him, she wrote me about a matter,
as I have said before, which lay near her heart --because it lay near her boy's.  She desired
me to confer with Mr. Greeley about turnips.  Turnips were the dream of her child's young ambition.
While other youths were frittering away in frivolous amusements the precious years of budding
vigor which God had given them for useful preparation, this boy was patiently enriching his
mind with information concerning turnips.  The sentiment which he felt toward the turnip was
akin to adoration.  He could not think of the turnip without emotion; he could not speak of
it calmly; he could not contemplate it without exaltation.  He could not eat it without shedding
tears.  All the poetry in his sensitive nature was in sympathy with the gracious vegetable.
With the earliest pipe of dawn he sought his patch, and when the curtaining night drove him
from it he shut himself up with his books and garnered statistics till sleep overcame him.
On rainy days he sat and talked hours together with his mother about turnips.  When company
came, he made it his loving duty to put aside everything else and converse with them all the
day long of his great joy in the turnip.

"And yet, was this joy rounded and complete?  Was there no secret alloy of unhappiness in it?
Alas, there was.  There was a canker gnawing at his heart; the noblest inspiration of his soul
eluded his endeavor--viz: he could not make of the turnip a climbing vine.  Months went by;
the bloom forsook his cheek, the fire faded out of his eye; sighings and abstraction usurped
the place of smiles and cheerful converse.  But a watchful eye noted these things and in time
a motherly sympathy unsealed the secret.  Hence the letter to me.  She pleaded for attention--she
said her boy was dying by inches.

"I was a stranger to Mr. Greeley, but what of that?  The matter was urgent.  I wrote and begged
him to solve the difficult problem if possible and save the student's life.  My interest grew,
until it partook of the anxiety of the mother.  I waited in much suspense.--At last the answer
came.

"I found that I could not read it readily, the handwriting being unfamiliar and my emotions
somewhat wrought up.  It seemed to refer in part to the boy's case, but chiefly to other and
irrelevant matters--such as paving-stones, electricity, oysters, and something which I took
to be 'absolution' or 'agrarianism,' I could not be certain which; still, these appeared to
be simply casual mentions, nothing more; friendly in spirit, without doubt, but lacking the
connection or coherence necessary to make them useful.--I judged that my understanding was
affected by my feelings, and so laid the letter away till morning.

"In the morning I read it again, but with difficulty and uncertainty still, for I had lost
some little rest and my mental vision seemed clouded.  The note was more connected, now, but
did not meet the emergency it was expected to meet.  It was too discursive.  It appeared to
read as follows, though I was not certain of some of the words:

      "Polygamy dissembles majesty; extracts redeem polarity; causes
      hitherto exist.  Ovations pursue wisdom, or warts inherit and
      condemn.  Boston, botany, cakes, folony undertakes, but who shall
      allay?  We fear not.  Yrxwly,
                               HEVACE EVEELOJ.'

"But there did not seem to be a word about turnips.  There seemed to be no suggestion as to
how they might be made to grow like vines.  There was not even a reference to the Beazeleys.
I slept upon the matter; I ate no supper, neither any breakfast next morning.  So I resumed
my work with a brain refreshed, and was very hopeful.  Now the letter took a different aspect-all
save the signature, which latter I judged to be only a harmless affectation of Hebrew.  The
epistle was necessarily from Mr. Greeley, for it bore the printed heading of The Tribune, and
I had written to no one else there.  The letter, I say, had taken a different aspect, but still
its language was eccentric and avoided the issue.  It now appeared to say:

      "Bolivia extemporizes mackerel; borax esteems polygamy; sausages
      wither in the east.  Creation perdu, is done; for woes inherent one
      can damn.  Buttons, buttons, corks, geology underrates but we shall
      allay.  My beer's out.  Yrxwly,
                                         HEVACE EVEELOJ.'

"I was evidently overworked.  My comprehension was impaired.  Therefore I gave two days to
recreation, and then returned to my task greatly refreshed.  The letter now took this form:

      "Poultices do sometimes choke swine; tulips reduce posterity; causes
      leather to resist.  Our notions empower wisdom, her let's afford
      while we can.  Butter but any cakes, fill any undertaker, we'll wean
      him from his filly.  We feel hot.
                                    Yrxwly, HEVACE EVEELOJ.'

"I was still not satisfied.  These generalities did not meet the question.  They were crisp,
and vigorous, and delivered with a confidence that almost compelled conviction; but at such
a time as this, with a human life at stake, they seemed inappropriate, worldly, and in bad
taste.  At any other time I would have been not only glad, but proud, to receive from a man
like Mr. Greeley a letter of this kind, and would have studied it earnestly and tried to improve
myself all I could; but now, with that poor boy in his far home languishing for relief, I had
no heart for learning.

"Three days passed by, and I read the note again.  Again its tenor had changed.  It now appeared
to say:

      "Potations do sometimes wake wines; turnips restrain passion; causes
      necessary to state.  Infest the poor widow; her lord's effects will
      be void.  But dirt, bathing, etc., etc., followed unfairly, will
      worm him from his folly--so swear not.
                                              Yrxwly, HEVACE EVEELOJ.'

"This was more like it.  But I was unable to proceed.  I was too much worn.  The word 'turnips'
brought temporary joy and encouragement, but my strength was so much impaired, and the delay
might be so perilous for the boy, that I relinquished the idea of pursuing the translation
further, and resolved to do what I ought to have done at first.  I sat down and wrote Mr. Greeley
as follows:

