

The engineers in front of the convent, being informed that the rifles with Captain Lee had
gone to our right considerably farther from the battery, advised that the rifles be supported
by an additional regiment. The same engineers advised that one gun be sent to the front to
drive the Mexicans from the roof of the convent, and thus relieve our troops on the right from
a destructive plunging fire.

The additional escort of two companies, asked for by the reconnoitring engineers, had not come
to the front. After Lieutenant Stevens had gone back to General Twiggs, to have one gun with
a few rounds of proper ammunition sent forward for the purpose of clearing the roof of the
convent, the firing in our front, on the San Antonio road, had materially increased; and the
fire from the convent, upon the engineer company, was becoming troublesome. There had been,
to me, unexpected delay in bringing the one gun forward; and I determined, as already stated,
to place the men under the best shelter at hand, and endeavor to make, in person, a closer
examination of the works.

Resuming quotations from my official report--it is therein stated:

"At this time the First Artillery came up to where I was. The lamented and gallant Burke, at
the head of the leading company, asked which direction they were to take. I inquired what were
his orders. He said that the regiment was ordered to support the Rifles. I pointed to the smoke,
which was all we could see by which to determine the position of our troops engaged in a corn-field
on our right; told him that they reached their present place by moving farther to the rear,
out of range of the works; and remarked to him that the fire through which he would have to
pass in the direction he was going was very severe. He replied that they were ordered to move
by that road to support the Rifles. The First Artillery filed by and soon encountered, at a
distance of 150 yards from the enemy, the heaviest fire of artillery and musketry, followed
almost immediately after [by that] brought to bear upon Taylor's battery, which had been ordered
to fire upon the convent; and, in selecting a place suitable for managing the guns, had most
unfortunately been placed, entirely exposed, directly in front of a well constructed battery
with heavy pieces firing in embrasure."

"As the First Artillery filed by me, I ordered my company to be formed, determined to go on
with the reconnaissance; and if possible, send back to the general, [Twiggs,] accurate information
in reference to the works of the enemy and the position of our own troops, which at that time
I could not understand. In moving forward, I was opposite the centre of the [First] Artillery
which inclined more to the left, toward the battery, whilst I kept nearer the [principal road
leading almost due east from Coyoacan]. The ground was level, but some shelter was afforded
to small bodies of men, by the ditches, maguey plant, etc. I ordered my men to separate, to
shelter themselves as much as possible, [and] to keep within supporting distance of me. I proceeded
about two hundred yards. I ordered every man to shelter himself in a small ditch which was
fortunately near us; immediately after I heard the fire of Taylor's battery passing directly
over my head. [When that fire commenced we were] in the corn-field, about half-way between
Taylor's battery and the enemy. Requiring my command to lie close, with Lieutenant Foster,
I made my way to an old ruined wall in the open space east of the corn-field, and from that
position sent Lieutenant Foster to General Twiggs to report the extent of the line engaged
on the right, that we were directly in front of the works [which were now in plain view], and
that, in my opinion, the whole force under General Twiggs's command should turn the enemy's
position by our left. Another battery [of the enemy] was seen distinctly to our right and far
in rear of the Churubusco battery, apparently enfilading our line engaged on the right. General
Twiggs had already sent Colonel Riley's brigade to turn the position by our left, and take
the battery by the gorge. When Lieutenant Foster returned, I withdrew the company to a position
of more safety, and joined General Smith and Lieutenant Stevens, who were near the place from
which I started with the First Artillery. I remained there [under General Smith's order] until
after the action." (Ex. Doc. No. 1, Appendix, pp. 70-71.)

That point was about 300 yards south-west of the convent. There were several adobe houses near,
and from it a road along which there were some huts, led to the convent, and another road,
almost due east, passed in front of the convent. In moving forward I had kept nearer the latter
road, the First Artillery nearer the former. The point I reached in the open, east of the corn-field,
was within less than 100 yards of the works at the convent, and there was every indication
that these works did not extend along the western side of that building.

The place at which I joined General Smith and Lieutenant Stevens, after I returned from beyond
the corn-field, was that at which it had been proposed to place one gun, under cover of the
adobe hut; run it out by hand; fire, and run it under shelter again to reload. By this means,
a few rounds of grape, canister, and shrapnel, could have cleared the roof of the convent.

In more senses than one, the firing of Taylor's battery through the ranks of the engineer company,
in the corn-field, was a surprise to me. I learned from Lieutenant Stevens that, when he applied
for one gun to be sent to the front, those in authority had deemed it best to send forward
a whole battery, and place it in an open field, square in front of the fortifications.

The battle of Churubusco was commenced, and mostly fought, haphazard, against the front of
the Mexican fortified lines, without giving time for proper reconnaissance.

General Scott, in his official report of the battle, says: "Lieutenant Stevens of the engineers,
supported by Lieutenant G. W. Smith's company of sappers and miners, of the same corps, was
sent to reconnoitre the strongly fortified church or convent of San Pablo in the hamlet of
Churubusco--one mile off [from Coyoacan]. Twiggs with one of his brigades [Smith's, less the
rifles] and Captain Taylor's field battery, were ordered to follow and to attack the convent.
Major Smith, senior engineer, was despatched to concert with Twiggs the mode of attack, and
Twiggs's other brigade [Riley's] I soon ordered to support him." (Ex. Doc. No. 1, p. 309.)

Major John L. Smith, senior engineer, says: "Lieutenant Stevens in the reconnaissance of the
position of Churubusco, was assisted by Lieutenant McClellan and escorted by the company of
sappers and miners. This company also participated in the operations of the right [of Twiggs's
division]". (Ex. Doc. No. 1, p. 353.)

Major Dimmick, commanding the First Regiment of Artillery, says: "About 12 o'clock, M., the
battalion was ordered to attack the position of the enemy at the church, reported by the engineers
at the time to have but one piece of artillery. The point of attack selected by the senior
engineer officer was masked by a corn-field, in front of which I deployed the battalion and
ordered it to advance, when almost instantly a shower of musketry, grape and round shot poured
upon us, under which the battalion advanced".

"The right had advanced to within one hundred yards of a regular bastion front, the curtain
of which had four pieces in embrasure, besides nearly a thousand infantry, both of which kept
up such a constant stream of fire that I could not advance further in line; I therefore ordered
the men to cover themselves as well as possible. The left of the battalion advanced to within
seventy yards of the work, being exposed to the fire of two pieces of artillery, en barbette,
in addition to the fire of a considerable force of infantry and some of them still nearer,
so that they had a destructive fire on the cannoniers and infantry; which position the battalion
maintained until the enemy were driven from their guns and bastion, when they were followed
into their work and surrendered." (Ex. Doc. No. 1, Appendix, p. 78.)

Captain Francis Taylor, commanding light battery, says: "On reaching Churubusco, we came in
sight of a church, where the enemy was posted, having, as was supposed, an entrenched battery
thrown across the road. Troops were soon thrown forward to attack this place; and, after a
short time, I was ordered to place the battery in a position where it was thought I could drive
the enemy from the roof and walls of the church, and sustain the other troops in their efforts
to carry this place by storm. On taking the position assigned me, I found we were exposed to
a most terrible fire of artillery and musketry, of a regular entrenchment, covering the front
of the church to which we were opposite, and which the intervening Indian corn hid from our
sight at the time. Here I opened my battery, and it was served with great precision for about
an hour and a half, notwithstanding it was exposed, during that time, to a constant shower
of grape, round shot, shell and musketry. At last, finding my loss was becoming very great,
and having succeeded in driving the enemy from the roof and walls of the church, and given
to our troops such support as was in my power, I determined to withdraw the pieces". (Ex. Doc.
No. 1, Appendix, p. 73).

The connection between the reconnaissance of the engineers, and the operations of the First
Artillery and Taylor's battery at Churubusco, has already been described in extracts taken
from my official report.

In his official report, General Persifor F. Smith says: "Lieutenant G. W. Smith, in command
of the engineer company, and Lieutenant McClellan, his subaltern, distinguished themselves
throughout the whole of the three actions [19th and 20th at Contreras; and at Churubusco].
Nothing seemed to them too bold to be undertaken, or too difficult to be executed; and their
services as engineers were as valuable as those they rendered in battle at the head of their
gallant men. Lieutenant Foster, being detached from his company during the action at Contreras,
did not fall under my notice; but in the action on the 19th and at Churubusco, he was equally
conspicuous for his gallantry". (Ex. Doc. No. 1, p. 332).

General Twiggs, in his official report, says: "To Lieutenant G. W. Smith, of the engineers,
who commanded the company of sappers and miners, I am under obligations for his services on
this and on other occasions. Whenever his legitimate duties with the pick and spade were performed,
he always solicited permission to join in the advance of the storming party with his muskets,
in which position his gallantry, and that of his officers and men, was conspicuously displayed
at Contreras as well as Cerro Gordo." (Ex. Doc. No. 1, p. 325.)

CHAPTER V.

CAPTURE OF THE CITY OF MEXICO.

During the armistice, which was entered into just after the battle of Churubusco, and terminated
on the 6th of September, the engineer company was quartered in the village of San Angel. On
the 7th of September I received orders to move the company, its train, and the general engineer
train of the army to Tacubaya.

MOLINO DEL REY. Lieutenant Foster was placed in charge of this detail. He and his men were
on the right of the storming party of five hundred picked men, of Worth's division, which led
the attack against Molino Del Rey on the morning of the 8th. In that attack Lieutenant Foster
was very severely wounded and disabled.

